                        26 page printout
    Reproducible Electronic Publishing can defeat censorship.

          This file, its printout, or copies of either
          are to be copied and given away, but NOT sold.

          Bank of Wisdom, Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                          ****     ****

Edited by E. Haldeman-Julius

The Black International                No. 1

                    THE VATICAN'S LAST CRIME

             HOW THE BLACK INTERNATIONAL JOINED THE
                   WORLD-PLOT AGAINST FREEDOM,
                    LIBERALISM, AND DEMOCRACY

                        by Joseph McCabe

                  HALDEMAN-JULIUS PUBLICATIONS
                    GIRARD   -- : --   KANSAS

                          ****     ****

                            Chapter I

                   THE FOULEST WAR IN HISTORY

     This war is one of the most deliberately aggressive, one of
the most bloody and costly, and the most revolting war in history.
It is not the work, of an Attila or a Genghis Khan, a man from the
wilds of Asia whose barbaric dreams of conquest had never been
checked by the ideals of modern civilization. It is the foul work
of men who know how the race has fought during a century and a
half, ever since the American and the French Revolutions, to rid
its life of the last taint of barbarism and had reached at least a
fair prospect of a final victory over violence and injustice: the
work of loathsome hypocrites, who masked with a pretense of
creating a higher social order the most monstrous greed, the most
abhorrent callousness, that ever debased the human mind.

     Historians have disputed how the guilt of the war of 1914-1918
must be distributed amongst the combatants. No historian will ever
hesitate in assigning the guilt for this war. it brands for all
time a relatively small number of men in Germany, Italy, and Japan.
It puts upon them this infamy, that from a barbaric lust of power
and "glory," which ought now to be confined to the idle dreams of
young schoolboys, and from an almost insane greed of wealth for
themselves and their supporters they set out to drench the planet
and in blood and bring incalculable misery upon hundreds of
millions of innocent men, women and children.

     These men, the Hitler's and Goering's and Goebbels of Germany
-- "the vilest triumvirate that has appeared in history, said the
late Ambassador Dodd, who knew them and knew history -- the
Mussolinis and Cianos of Italy, the Hirohitos and Matsuokas of
Japan saw with wide-open eyes the tragic close of the last war.
They knew that nearly 9,000,000 men in the prime of life had been
slaughtered in altars that were less merciful than those of the 

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               1

                    THE VATICAN'S LAST CRIME

Aztecs; yet they were prepared to sacrifice even more on the sordid
altars of their hellish ambitions. They had seen desolation from
Calais to Poland: and they proposed to spread a worse desolation
over the greater part of the earth. They had learned how in the
last war at least $100,000,000,000 of the wealth that men
laboriously create and meagerly share -- not to count the waste of
man-power and the paralysis of trade -- had been thrown into a
morass; yet knowing the advance of science and expecting a larger
theater of war they would squander more than that sum in the
pursuit of their greed.

     The historian of the future who will coldly write these lines
will add a fourth count to the charge. During the twenty years
between the two great wars we had caught a vision of a new and
better world. That light of science which, as it slowly dawns,
enriches the imagination of man with plans that are more hopeful
and more confident than those offered us by any utopian, had grown
brighter. You remember how ten years ago America rang with
discussion of the promises of the Technocrats. Professors said that
we could, if we were wise, "smother every family in America with
commodities," Engineers became visionaries and made blueprints of
a world in which poverty would be unknown and no man would feel
that gnawing anxiety about holding the job which a dozen jobless
hungrily envied. No more of this niggardly counting of dimes when
the children want to go to the pictures, of dollars for the winter
boots and clothe's . . . An exaggeration, if you like, but every
man knows that there is a great and solid scientific truth behind
it all. And now, instead of seeing our wealth grow and brighten a
million drab homes, we must pour down the military drain a sum with
which we could have transformed the face of the earth, and we must
see our industrial productiveness pass from prostitution to
weariness.

     That was only half the promise of science. Those knowing folk
who read so little and talk so much asked, when you spoke about
this promise of the future: Can you change human nature? You can
build a house for a pig but it remains a pig. And while folk were
glibly repeating this old saw science was quietly proving that it
is just one more popular fallacy like the luck of a rabbit's foot
or the ill-luck of number thirteen, the virtue of priests or the
wisdom of Popes. By 1930 the science of psychology had conducted
the "soul" or "mind" to its frontiers, thanking it for its
provisional services -- if any. What was left to study was human
behavior, and as we examined this in a scientific light we saw
that, instead of it being unalterable or requiring a prodigious
time to change, it is one of the most modifiable things under the
sun. Precisely because it is human. Man's behavior differs from the
rigid automatic behavior of the pig just in that fact that it is
not rigid and automatic. It depends upon ideas and stimulations
from without which can be changed; as Russia changed them for its
people, with stupendous results, in less than a generation.

     It is one of the tragic ironies of our time that, apart from
Russia, it was only the criminal Dictators who acted upon this rich
principle of science. As late as the end of 1929 Hitler had not yet
poisoned the minds -- the mechanism of behavior -- of one in 350 of
the German people. He had 180,000 followers in a population of 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               2

                    THE VATICAN'S LAST CRIME

60,000,000. Han's wanted a quiet life, his big pipe and mug of beer
and friendly neighbors, just as we do. He would have shuddered if
someone had foretold that in ten years he would, because he
accepted the lead of a criminal lunatic and a bunch of greedy
adventurers, see his wife and little Gretchen just splashes of
churned flesh and blood under the ruins of the home he had built
for them. But Goebbels changed his "human nature" in six years.
Mussolini, or Gayda, did the same, with the help of the priests of
Italy. The Japs did the same with their fishers and farmers and
textile workers, seizing and prostituting all the magnificent means
of instruction that science has provided -- the school and college,
the radio and the cinema, the printing press and the library --
these poisoners of the human race had the majority of folk in three
nations soon howling like wolves at the scent of blood. Had it not
been for this we were within measurable distance of a genuine era
of peace, comfort, and brotherhood.

     This, you may say, certainly looks like what happened, but
it's impossible. How could a gang, smaller than that which looted
New York in 1860 or St. Louis in 1890, take over a whole country,
make a corrupt fortune that beggars Tammany, and have a very fair
chance of becoming super-emperors?

     Think again; and start with the fact that a small minority of
men in three countries, men of the vilest character and of colossal
greed, did secure control of those countries and organize them for
war. No one disputes that. And if you have had this success
explained to you on the line that Italy and Germany had, through
the conduct of Some melodramatic villains called Reds or
Bolsheviks, fallen into an anarchy that ruined their economies, and
that Mussolini and Hitler came along with "ideologies" which
promised deliverance from this anarchy, put the theory in the
trash-basket with the stories of Washington's cherry tree and
William Tell's apple. It's worse. It is, as we shall see later, a
lie. For years Mussolini and Hitler were just small-scale gangsters
directing mobs of hoodlums with bottles of castor-oil, loaded
whips, and automatics. They ranked in the European press, when it
thought fit to notice them, as part of the scum that had boiled to
the surface in a time of trouble.

     It was just because they had no appeal to thinking men,
because they had relied upon disorder and brutality instead of
order and discipline to attain such position as they had, that
certain larger and more respectable forces -- wealth, privilege,
and religion -- took them up and gave them that control of the
spring's of opinion and behavior which has enabled them to make a
lie look like a grand truth, a gangster's plan seem a schedule of
national salvation. Thyssen wandering about Europe telling
everybody how the Nazis took his millions and double-crossed him is
one of the thousands who thought they could hire the gunman as the
White Knights of Privilege and then dismiss them with a suitable
reward. The heads of the German Church are only less outspoken
because they are still within reach of the Nazi lash. The King of
Italy fumes in his Quirinal just as the Pope does in his Vatican.
It is -- to borrow a Phrase from French history -- the Day of
Dupes.



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               3

                    THE VATICAN'S LAST CRIME

     Until we understand this the blight which has cursed our life
and the Vatican's share in causing it will remain painful and
disquieting mysteries. Advertisement is a mild variety of hypnotism
weakened by the fact that the advertiser has limited resources, and
a hundred rivals. Smith's soup is the finest in the world until you
see Jones's poster on the next hoarding. Now the Fascist system was
so successful in corrupting nations, once its highly respectable
patrons had given it wealth and power, because it uses the
hypnotism of the advertiser in its ideal form: no rivalry, no
discordant note, unlimited resources, the employment of every
device from the pulpit, to the professor's chair or the urchin with
his bit of chalk. You may object that at all events there must be
something sensible, convincing, attractive in the message that is
brayed and blazed everywhere. Is it always necessary? If you assail
ear and eye at every moment of the day for years with "Heil Hitler"
or "Mussolini Solo" millions will begin to see genius in a
neuropathic or a brutal adventurer who ought to be selling beef and
mutton. however, there was a message, and it was very convincing.

     Take the case of Germany. On April 3, 1938 the leading German
scientific weekly, Die Umschau, contained an article, not too
prominently displayed, on the future of Germany in Europe. It was
the program of the New Order, yet as far as I can ascertain, not a
single paper in Britain or America noticed it. It described a
system of ship-canals and canalization of lakes, already more than
half constructed in 1938, which would connect every industrial town
in Germany along the Danube and even across France and Belgium,
with nearly every country and port in Europe. The scientific
writer, who ended with a "Heil Hitler," coldly explained how all
Europe would then supply food and raw materials to Germany and
receive payment in manufactured goods. This, in a respectable
scientific periodical, was the raw program of the future
enslavement of Europe, the paralysis of industry in every country,
and the colossal enrichment of the German manufacturer and worker.
That was the bait. Neither, Thyssen nor Hans cared the toss of a
coin about theories of Nordic blood or Nazi ideology. it was a
stupendous greed that was dangled before the eyes of Germany; and
the poor fish in Italy, who believes that he would share the loot,
used the bait to attract his own industrialists and workers. Japan
notoriously has nothing but the same shameless greed behind its
bland talk of New Order and Asia for the Asiatic.

     Few took any notice when, in 1938, I drew attention to this
and similar articles in the responsible German press. At the time
there was still a world-chorus of praise for the "order and
efficiency" of the Nazi system, and it would not do to admit a
jarring note. Folk were told that, while there was no need of
Fascism in the United States and Great Britain, these other -- or
inferior -- countries were "without form and void" and "darkness
was upon the face of the deep," and it was fine that the spirit of
Fascism "moved upon the face of the waters" creating a new world.
This Fascism, it was said, menaced only disorderly folk, sadists,
atheists, corruptors of women and children -- the Reds, in short.
What a tissue of lies it has all turned out to be! Roosevelt was
deluded as effectively as Chamberlain or Reynaud; Cardinal
Dougherty as effectively as the Pope. The historian of the future
will not ask how a few gunmen nearly became the emperors of half 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               4

                    THE VATICAN'S LAST CRIME

the world. That is already clear. He will ask why the world looked
on supinely, even applauding, while these men built a force. of so
formidable a character that they almost compassed their sordid aim.

     There can be only one answer. The statesmen, industrialists,
bankers, and bishops of America are as able and well-informed as
those of Germany and Japan and far superior to those of Italy. They
were deluded about the Fascist program because one clause of it so
far coincided with their own interests that they were not disposed
to pay close attention to the other clauses. The great thing was
that they promised to cheek the rapid world-growth of Socialism.
But the other clauses of the program were plain enough from the
start. The only change in the scheme of the gunmen in recent years
is that it has been expanded until it aims at conquering and
exploiting more than half the earth; and this is not so near to
lunacy as some would have us believe, It was due to a cold
calculation of the possibilities in view of the supineness or
complacency of the democratic governments and their press and the
support of the Black International.

     Japan, Germany, and Italy have made no secret of their
aggressive imperialistic schemes during the last ten years. I
described them in full in 1937 in three booklets of "The A B C
Library of Living Knowledge," taking the facts from semi-official
and other reliable publications. There was no secrecy about these
publications. It was a necessary part of Mussolini's appeal to the
mob from the first that, once the politicians were cleared away, he
would make a greater Italy by annexing Malta, Corsica, Savoy, and
Dalmatia. Little girls read that in their balilia catechisms and
even little girls knew that this meant war on England, France, and
Yugo-Slavia. It was equally necessary for Hitler to promise that he
would restore the greatness of Germany by bringing in all German-
speaking lands (Austria, Alsace, and part of Switzerland, Czecho-
Slovakia and Denmark); and to these he added as early as 1924, in
Mein Kampf, the annexation of the Ukraine and the annihilation of
France. That meant a European War. Japan has for the last ten years
organized great patriotic societies, With millions of members,
demanding the annexation of the eastern half of Asia and all
islands of the Pacific. These three programs were the protocol of
a world war; the war by which we now suffer. In my three booklets
I showed that there was not the least uncertainty about that. It is
just another fairy-tale for adults that the Axis has sprung a
surprise upon an innocent world.

     The vital question which we have to ask is why America, Great
Britain, and France permitted, without arming themselves, the three
robber nations to create so gigantic a military force that they had
a real hope of attaining their object and dividing the earth into
three Fascist spheres: into two, rather, because Germany and Japan
never regarded Mussolini as more than a catspaw. In a general way
you know the answer to this question. The Fascists were going to
destroy the Reds and that was so monumental a service to the
democracies, or to their ruling class and their Churches, that even
diplomats and statesmen and prelates took the word of the arch-
liars that they would cultivate peace when they had crushed the
Reds. They were not ignorant but they were guilty of a gross amount
of wishful thinking. Even when Mussolini publicly and brazenly said


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               5

                    THE VATICAN'S LAST CRIME

that he offered the world "peace resting on eight million bayonets"
they put it down as a harmless overflow of a strong man's strength.
When, in 1934, he made the most deliberate and official statement
of the nature of Fascism (in the article "Fascismo" in his new
Encyclopedia Italians), saying that Fascism regarded war as the
noblest work of the race and peace as a degrading ideal, statesmen
and journalists pretended that they had never read it. So through
five shameful years the world that was threatened with an appalling
disaster smiled and praised the "efficiency" of the butchers who
were sharpening their knives; because the world is now ruled by its
press, and of the papers on which men relied the world over nine
copies out of ten came from the editorial offices and printing
shops of rich men who wanted the Reds suppressed at any price.

     But where, you ask, does the Black International enter this
conspiracy, as it really was? We are going to see immediately that
of all the privileged minorities which dreaded the Reds and were
therefore far too easily duped by the promises of the Anti-Reds the
Church of Rome had the most urgent need of relief. The cry will be
raised, of course, that I now accuse the Papacy of causing the war.
That sort of rubbish is a necessary part of the Catholic
propagandist system. What I do say is that the Papacy allied itself
with Italy, as everybody knows, with Japan, as everybody ought to
know -- it is only a year since the Vatican coined a gold medal for
the virtuous Matsuoka -- and, as far as it was allowed to do so,
with Germany, and that it used its international organization to
create that fierce and confused hatred of Communism on which the
Axis would rely when the crisis of the war was reached. Of that
international plotting in every country these ten booklets will
provide decisive evidence. It is shame enough that a Church which
makes such arrogant claims of moral superiority, a Church which
professes to have the finest international intelligence-service and
to be inflexible in the condemnation of crime, should be silent, as
it was silent, during ten years of monstrous outrages -- Manchukuo,
Austria, Abyssinia, etc. -- but the Pope has a deeper shame. He
played an active part over and over again on the side of the devil.
Because the Church of Rome was not merely threatened, like all
wealth and privilege, by the growth of Socialism -- it was in fact
breaking up under the impact, and only the violent suppression of
the Socialists, if necessary by war, could arrest this
disintegration.

                           Chapter II

                   JUST WHAT THE PAPACY NEEDED

     There are various ways of divining into sections the broad
stream of events which we call human history. One might divide it
from a sociological viewpoint into two parts: the rise and the fall
of privilege. During the first 3,000 years of history we find an
ever-widening gap between a privileged minority and the working
majority. Once upon a time men had chosen able and strong men to
"rule" them, and these had chosen "companion's" (Counts) and
"leaders" (Dukes) of the troops who shared their privileges. In
those days it was considered just as important to ward off evil
spirits and flatter good spirits, and cunning men who could
persuade their fellows that they were particularly skilful at this 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               6

                    THE VATICAN'S LAST CRIME

sort of work founded another privileged caste. With the growth of
wealth, when men began to live in cities, the glamour of the sacred
castes -- kings, nobles, and priests -- increased, The Kings were
Sons of God, and the priests were his very special friends. Palaces
and temples, the mansions of the rich, the nobles, and the chief
priests, rose high above the clutter of mean homes.

     That is another story, but it is necessary to outline it
because the world-torture which we endure in this generation is a
vital stage in the second half of history; the era of the undoing
of privilege. The "profound" folk -- usually literary men whose
knowledge of any branch of positive learning would hardly fill a
five-cent note-book -- who now enlighten us about our problems by
essays, feature-articles, and sermons have made some remarkable
discoveries about our age. It is sick; it is degenerate; it is
World-weary; it has the insolence of youth; it relies too much on
old men; it misses the firm guidance of religion; it talks too much
about rights and too little about duties, and so on.

     It is all bunk. For instance, one of the most persistent
charges is that, being irreligious, our younger men have lost the
Spirit of sacrifice, whereas in Europe and China at least
15,000,000 bravely confront the horrible dangers of a modern war,
and certainly four-fifths of them (Germans, Russians, British and
Chinese) have no religion. The truth is that our generation, our
degenerate, frivolous, selfish generation, has taken up, and more
vigorously than ever, a task which the race has approached whenever
and wherever it was free during the last 2,500 years; to reduce the
harsh contrasts of privilege and service, idleness and work, wealth
and poverty. Our age does not mind paying a good price for high
service, but it doubts if the services of priests and kings are
worth billions of dollars to a nation, and the conviction spreads
that the entire system of privilege is the chief obstacle to the
scientific organization and betterment of life. The world of
privilege is, as it has always done, reacting bloodily to the
revolt.

     The work of undoing privilege began 2500 years ago in the
cities of Ionia, on the coast of Asia Minor, where Greeks mingled
with men of many races on free soil. There were no kings or nobles,
the priest's had little power, and the rich -- moderately rich --
men served as merchants and in their leisure did some very useful
thinking for the race. Privilege -- the Kings of Persia --
scattered them, and Greece took up the task. It got rid of its
kings and listened to philosophers rather than priests; and if the
Romans to whom the torch was next passed, apostatized to the extent
of restoring monarchy and allowing some to become very rich --
though not nearly so rich as our multi-millionaires -- they at
least exacted a princely price in superb free services to the
workers. Then the night of the Dark Age fell upon Europe.

     Now that Professors as well as politicians have a great
respect for "the venerable Church of Rome" and its "august head" we
must, it appears, not talk about a Dark Age. Please yourself. The
facts are that whereas in the later days of the Roman Empire three
workers out of four had been free men, nine out of ten of them were
during the Dark Age (500-1100) serfs, which is the polite French 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               7

                    THE VATICAN'S LAST CRIME

way of saying slaves; whereas the Roman workers had all free
education (and free bread, free games, free medical service, etc.),
nine out of ten in the new Europe were totally illiterate and of an
incredible ignorance; and that whereas the Roman and Greeks of the
fourth century had had the protection of a fine code of law and in
general character were as good as we are, law was almost as extinct
as art in the new Europe, and the grossness of manners and morals
was indescribable. But please yourself, I am merely, in all
clarity, explaining why the work of human redemption was dropped
for five or six centuries.

     What it is important to know if we want to understand our own
age is that from the time when Europe mentally awoke, in the
eleventh century, to our days this attempt to put the world right
has inspired three great revolutions, and what we witness today is
the most logical and the broadest of the three. After five
centuries of revolts -- the Popes had to fight a republican
movement in their own city for two centuries -- and bloody
reprisals Europe saw that the Roman Church was the arch-enemy and
its power must be broken. Hence the Reformation. On the last
ghastly fields of the Thirty Years' War, the War of Catholicism and
Protestantism, which was one of the most savage and squalid in
history, the race won its first great victory over privilege; and
it is pleasant as well as informing to recall that this first
instalment of freedom was won in large part through the criminal
misbehavior of the Popes themselves. They had stored away in Rome
a treasure of at least a quarter of a billion dollars to help the
Catholics when the war came, and when it reached its crisis Pope
Urban VIII gave the whole vast sum to his greedy and vicious
relatives. You can read that in the latest Catholic History of the
Popes (Hayward's, 1931).

     Some of our advanced writers smile at the Reformation, but in
point of fact it released forces which brought about a rapid
progress in wealth and science and inspired the deeper revolt; the
revolt which flared up in the American and the French Revolutions
and then for a hundred years sustained a struggle against reaction
and privilege which was as heroic as any in history. The fight was
now against Church and feudalism as against priests and kings (and
their politicians) in alliance. America, having abolished
feudalism, had no share in it except to welcome refugees, and so
there is some excuse for the very shabby treatment of it in
American schools, colleges, and history books. But the chief reason
for the suppression of it is Catholic influence because it knocks
into a cocked hat everything that the apologists say about the
Church. I gave a fairly full account of it in various volumes of
the Appeal to Reason Library and must here confine myself to what
is vitally required in order to understand the Black International
and the lies of its apologists.

     Five year's ago, when we began to try to help Spain and I
recalled Spain's magnificent record in the nineteenth-century
struggle, a Communist leader, a friend of mine, disdainfully swept
that struggle aside as "merely a political revolution" and -- this
was the main point -- thought it wrong to antagonize Catholics by
talking about it. I doubt if the economic revolt would have been
possible if the political-religious revolutions had not been 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               8

                    THE VATICAN'S LAST CRIME

carried first. In any case, a few years later Communism was extinct
in most of Europe and South America, and the Church of Rome was
shrieking for the blood of "Bolsheviks" from one side of the planet
to the other. In fact, Catholic writers are now saying everywhere
that this Liberalism of the last century is the real root of all
our modern disorder, and the official attitude of the Church is to
claim a full restoration of the royalist-clerical regime for which
it had fought in the last century. Would-be kings, semi-consecrated
loafers, wait with its blessing, on the frontiers of France, Spain,
Portugal, Austria and Hungary; and of course poor Leopold of
Belgium, whom the Church has white-washed, is going to be put back
on his golden throne.

     Whatever satisfaction anyone finds in dismissing the
revolution of the last century, the fight to hold the gains of the
French Revolution, as "a mere political struggle" or a "bourgeois
revolution," the story of it is vitally relevant to our tragedy
today, and it is just on that account that it is suppressed or
toned down in our educational and historical literature. For it
shows, even as you find it told in the most important European
manuals, that it is the black priests and their white allies who
were guilty of just such murderous excesses and vindictive
massacres as they now mendaciously attribute to the Reds.

     In the course of the Nineteenth Century nearly half a million
unnamed men, women, and children were done to death, on scaffolds
and in massacres and deadly jail's, for claiming less -- they were
as a rule not republicans -- than the rights granted in the
American Constitution of 1787. If we care to add the men who, from
Poland to Peru, died on the battlefield for the sacred cause the
number rises to more than a million, but let us keep to the unarmed
victims and their very moderate demands. These men and women, and
often children, were crushed with a savagery that surpasses even
the worst features of the untruthful stories about the Reds in
Spain and Russia; and the murderers and torturers were in nearly
every case directed by priests and bishops who cooperated with
monarchs (of Naples, Spain, and Portugal) of the vilest type of
character. The outrages were so revolting and the complicity of the
Church so clear, that the Catholic historian, Lord Acton, the one
outstanding historian the Church can claim in modern times, wrote
to the Catholic historian Lady Blennerhassett:

          The accomplices of the Old Man of the Mountains (the
     classic assassins of history) picked off individual victims,
     but the Papacy contrived murder and massacre on the largest
     and also on the most cruel and inhuman scale. They were not
     only wholesale assassins, but they also made the principle of
     assassination a law of the Christian Church and a condition of
     salvation. (Selections from the Correspondence of the First
     Lord Acton, 1917, Vol. I, p. 55.)

     You may read the horrible details in the Cambridge Modern
History (Vol X) the greatest historical work in the English
language, or in any standard history of modern Spain, Portugal
Italy, and Austria.




                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               9

                    THE VATICAN'S LAST CRIME

     These are the undisputed historical facts and the recognized
authorities upon which I base the statement which I have put in
italic's and in bold face words. And on the same solid ground I now
make another statement in bold face words, because these are the
essential points to remember: The people recovered power from the
clerical-royalists repeatedly but they never indulged in reprisals,
much less savagery, as the Black-and-Whites always did. There were,
naturally, local outbursts against the defeated tyrants, a few
churches were burned and priests killed, but the authorities always
checked these spurts of violence. Who, then, are the real Reds?

     What about the famous French Revolution, you may ask? You will
find it strange, if you reflect, that when Catholic (and some other
writers) want to show you how the "mob" is prone to commit
outrages, especially if it is deprived of "the restraints of
religion", they skip from the French Revolution of 1789 to the
Russian Revolution of 1917. They refuse to glance at the dozen
important revolutions which lie between because these were always
followed by clerical-royalist, savagery when the Whites recovered
power; a savagery which led Lord Acton, in his day one of the
leading historians in England, to denounce his own Popes and the
worst assassins in history. But they also tell long discredited
lies about the French and the Russian Revolutions.

     Historians are now agreed within narrow limits about the
September Massacre and the Terror which are the chief charges
against the French Revolution, as you will find in Lavisse's
standard history of France, the equivalent of the Cambridge
History, and more recent French works. In the September Massacre
there were only about 1100 victims, and most of these were
criminals and prostitutes from the jails. It is agreed that only
about 500 men were involved in the butchery, and the hundreds of
thousands of citizens of Paris were horrified. In the Terror
(1793-4) there were about 18,000 victims -- there had been at least
30,000 in a few days in the horrible Catholic St. Bartholomew
Massacre -- and only one-fifth of these were nobles, priests, and
nuns, while 67 percent were atheistic working men. It was a fight
of rival political parties, and the leader of the winning party,
the director of the carnage, Robespierre was a fanatically
religious man who hated Atheism. What is worse, Catholic writers
never mention, and very few other writer's ever mention, that there
was a White Terror in 1794 and after the fall of Napoleon which
was, more brutal, than the Terror of 1793. You probably never heard
of it. That is how the education of democracies is conducted today;
to the great satisfaction of the Church and the reactionaries.

     The long and bloody fight which, as I said, dragged on through
the nineteenth century and was maintained in Russia and Spain until
our own time was part of this second European Revolution. By 1920
it seemed to have triumphed everywhere, but the third revolution
had already begun. We may call this the Economic Revolution but it
was much broader. Socialism -- not the Anglo-American anaemic type
but as the world knew it -- threatened a comprehensive war on
privilege; on rank, wealth, priestly immunities, political
corruption, and all sorts of "rulers." And just because it was so
all-embracing, every variety of privilege that it threatened took
alarm, and they formed a grand coalition. The Unholy Alliance of 
1814 was alive again.

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               10

                    THE VATICAN'S LAST CRIME

     To enlist in its support the more simple-minded folk and the
masses who had no wealth or privileges to fight for the cry of
Communism, Bolshevism, or the Reds was raised. The enemy is, of
course, Socialism, because it aims to create a new social order in
which there shall be no great private wealth, no chance to make a
million, no rich landowners, no hereditary rank or office, no
parasitism, no privileges of priests. The present Pope may be as
ignorant as you like to think him outside of his theology and
Church Law but he did know, when he told his Catholics that
"Communism is the greatest evil in the world" and called for a
crusade against it that outside Russia Communism never had a
prospect of attaining power and in Russia -- the Union of Socialist
Soviet Republics, remember -- it is an ideal of the future.
Mussolini, we shall see, confesses that he laughed in his sleeve
when he raised the boogie of Communism in Italy, and in Spain the
Communists were the smallest, if not the most respectable, of the
popular parties. But it would not do to talk of extinguishing
Socialism when the Labor Party in England occasionally calls itself
Socialist, so they set up the scarecrow of Communism or Bolshevism
and clothed it in ragged stories of rape and murder.

     In view of it's history the Papacy would inevitably join its
natural allies -- wealth, power, and privilege -- but in the
present state of the world it had a special and very pressing
reason. During the fifteen years -- say from 1919 or 1920 -- after
Socialism began to spread from Russia over the world the Vatican
lost, mainly through its influence, more than four times as many
followers as it had lost at the Reformation.

     The Press is now so much controlled in the Catholic interest
that this will seem to many a startling statement. It is, in fact,
well within the range of demonstrable facts. If you reflect that,
as you will find, the population of Great Britain, the largest
seceding country, in the days of Henry VIII was only about
4,000,000, you easily see that the total loss to the Vatican at the
Reformation could hardly be more than 12,000,000. But beyond
question it lost, mainly to Socialism and Communism, at least
50,000,000 between 1919 and the beginning of the Fascist reaction.
The largest items in this total will be vindicated as we proceed
but a few words of explanation will reconcile the reluctant reader
to it.

     In countries where there was a clear-cut issue of Church and
anti-Church at the polls -- Spain, the South American Republics,
Italy, Mexico, Germany, and Austria -- the election figures give a
very safe indication, and they show that in each of these cases
(except Mexico and Austria) the Church had lost, and the Socialists
had gained, at least 10,000,000. Add Russia (where Catholicism was
nearly extinguished), Mexico, Czecho-Slovakia (where, we shall see,
the Catholic clergy admit a loss of about 2,000,000), Holland, and
Austria (where the Socialists held Vienna until they were
treacherously disarmed for Hitler by gallant little Dollfuss), and
further losses in France, Belgium . . . Need I say more? The loss
was probably nearer 70,000,000 than 50,000,000. After the anti-
clerical revolution in Spain in 1932 the only countries in the
world that remained officially loyal to the Vatican were Poland and
Hungary. We will not count Mussolini's Italy.


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               11

                    THE VATICAN'S LAST CRIME

     The Roman Church knows from seven centuries of experience,
ever since the Albigensian Massacre, that it never recovers ground
by an intellectual appeal, by honest propaganda. How was it to
check this new and appalling leakage? Only, as in all ages, by an
alliance with forces which could and would trample on the ideals of
peace and freedom. Fascism was just what it needed.

                           Chapter III

                 IS THE CHURCH OF ROME FASCIST?

     America has been so drenched in recent years with Catholic
claims that the Church is ideally democratic and that the Pope is
-- or has been since democracy seemed to have won its battle
against feudalism -- the inflexible champion of political justice
and freedom that some may imagine that an alliance with Fascism is
unthinkable. We shall see largely on the testimony of Catholics, in
the following booklets that this alliance is an elementary fact of
the present situation, but it is easy to show at once that this
Catholic description of the Church's attitude which is broadcast in
the United states -- and now in the United States only -- is a
mockery.

     The British Catholic writer, W. Teeling (The Pope in Politics,
1937), who has quite a reputation for boldness, almost heresy, is,
his own sect, says that there are 350,000,000 Catholics in the
world. How Teeling came to be described as bold and critical I do
not know. He criticizes the Church only in the matter of Abyssinia
and only the most expert clerical -- shall we say manipulators of
truth? try to defend it on that point. With his 350,000,000
Catholics he goes 20,000,000 better than the sufficiently audacious
official claim, and, recalling how Macaulay gave the total as
150,000,000 a century ago, he ask us to admire the miracle of its
growth. But when you reflect on the high Catholic birth rate -- you
go to hell, the priest tells Catholic parents, if you cheat the
Church of possible subscribers by using contraceptives -- and when
you learn, as you easily can, that according to the experts, the
population of a modern State would, without birth control, double
every third of a century, the miracle looks rather tawdry. The
Catholic total now obviously ought to be 600,000,000. It is in
point of fact less than 200,000,000.

     You smile at the figure of 330,000,000 when, if you take the
trouble to look up Catholic statistics, you find that it includes
30,000,000 in France, where optimistic Catholic writers do not
claim 10,000,000; 30,000,000 in Germany, where Hitler plays
skittle's with the Church; 40,000,000 in Italy, where as long ago
as 1919 the banned Socialists polled 1,840,593 votes (more than
half of the literate adult males) out of 3,500,000; 24,000,000 in
Spain, where it took the armies of three nations two years to put
the clerical Humpty Dumpty back on the wall; 60,000,000 in South
America, where the Blacks keep power only by the use of violence,
torture, and the zeal of masses of illiterate Indians. And so on.
These are the little pleasantries of Catholic arithmetic.





                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               12

                    THE VATICAN'S LAST CRIME

     Let us say 200,000,000. Where are they? Now, no sophistry can
obscure the lesson of the answer to that; and it is the same 
whether you prefer to speak of 150,000,000 or 350,000,000
Catholics. Apart from the "converts" on foreign missions, who might
be classed as consumers goods, nine-tenths of the Pope's subjects
live under a Fascist flag. That fact is so uncomfortable that even
the most ingenious American apologist prefers to say nothing about
it. They live under the regimes of Vichy France, Franco Spain,
Salazar Portugal, Mussolini Italy, Horthy Hungary, and in the
Republics of South and Central America, nearly all of which are
Fascist, Poland was Fascist before it became compulsorily Nazi. And
not the boldest apologist can say, even to his own flock, that this
fact gives pain to the democratic Pope. Everybody knows that he
warmly blesses the Fascist regime under which they live and urges
it as the model for all Catholic countries. He has to. In an
atmosphere of freedom his Church always crumbles.

     Who are the enemies of Fascism? Russia, where the Church has
virtually perished because of its political intrigues, is the most
effective and most thorough going enemy, Great Britain, where
Catholics are less than one-twentieth of the population, is next.
I do not say the British Empire because the Catholic half of Canada
is Fascist, and the Catholics of Australia are, under the lead of
anti-British Archbishop Mannix, by no means united for the struggle
against Fascism. Third is the United States, where genuine
Catholics are less than one-tenth of the population but very much
more than one-tenth of the Isolationists. In sum, there are in
Europe and America 350,000,000 non-Catholic thorough opponents of
Fascism to about 20,000,000 Catholic more-or-less opponent's. Add
Asia, and you have 1,000,000,000 non-Catholic opponents, fighting
or ready to fight against Fascism, and less than 30,000,000
Catholics.

     Who were the chief traitors to the cause of democratic
civilization? Catholic France -- that is to say, the Catholic and
Pope-directed part of France, Belgium (or its Fascists, royalists,
and priests), and the Catholic Croats of Yugo-Slavia.

     Who made the best fight against the invading Huns? Norway,
which has only 2000 Catholics to nearly 3,000,000 Protestants; the
Serbs, who are bitterly anti-Papal and were let down by the
Catholic provinces of their country; Greece, where the Pope has no
influence; and Russia, where, if you will forgive in Irishism, he
has still less. Not for a moment do I belittle the fine resistance
of Poland, but it was not fighting Fascism as such. It was already
Fascist and had for twenty years persecuted religious minorities.
It fought for its national independence and to prevent the
extension to Poland of the anti-clerical elements of Nazism.

     What is the Constitution of the Catholic Church? It is the
newest approach on earth to that of Nazi Germany. The Church is a
despotic monarchy. The Pope may not only disregard the collective
opinion of his cardinals (his cabinet) but he is not bound to
submit to the decisions of a general council of all the bishops,
arch-bishops and abbots of the Catholic world. He is the Fuhrer,
with the additional prerogative of infallibility.



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               13

                    THE VATICAN'S LAST CRIME

     What is the law of the Catholic Church? The most tyrannical
code of law in the world. The Church has two sets of laws: a code
of Public Law, which in plain English means Private Law because it
is kept in a dead language and taught to very few priests and no
laymen, and Private Law, which you may prefer to call Public Law
because it alone is translated into modern languages and accessible
to the general public. You may read this in an American
translation, if you are able to disentangle the text from the
artful commentaries of the translator's. It is Fascist enough, if
Fascism means tyranny. It treats the Catholic laity like sheep.
They must not read a criticism of the Church and its untruthful
literature without the permission of a priest who will insist on
"replying" to it. Penalty -- hell. They must not discuss such
matters with a critical non-Catholic friend or hear a lecture that
may be critical. They must urge non-Catholics to read both sides
but never do it themselves. They must not marry except on lines
prescribed by the Church whether these accord with civil law or
not. Penalty -- hell. They must never get a divorce. Penalty --
hell. But if they are rich the Church will find, even if they have
been married twenty years and have ten children, that they never
were married at all.

     The Public Law of the Church is the most arrogant and most
truculent code in the history of jurisprudence, It is supposed to
define the relations of the Church to other corporations (states,
etc.) but if the Church has a bit of legislation which might look
rather naked and immodest in English, it keeps this also under the
veil of the dead language of the Public Law. For instance, it is
one of the most emphatic principles of this Public Law (which is
never made public) that you cannot leave the Church and so escape
its jurisdiction, and that if you say that you no longer believe in
it and have quitted it the Church has "the right and the duty." to
put you to death. I pass sleepless nights under the shadow of this
awful sentence which has been hanging over me for 45 years. The
fundamental principle of the law is that the Church, being the only
institution on earth that has been established by God, is the only
"perfect society," and therefore it has the right to overrule and
dictate to merely secular and human states on any point which it
chooses to regard as affecting religion or morals; and believe me,
the clerical genius could prove in five minutes that the color of
your wall-paper or the number of your blankets is a question of
morals. It follows at once that the Church will, where it has the
power, not tolerate the practice or propaganda of any other
religion, much less irreligion, or any criticism of itself or its
priests; that no priest must be tried in a civil court; that all
schools must be subject to clerical authority, and so on.

     Well, you may say, a dead language means a dead letter. Pardon
me. Latin may be a dead language to you but it is the living
language of the Church. This ultra-medieval law is not dead letter
but is taught today in the international Papal (or Gregorian)
University at Rome, to which selected American priests are sent,
just as a few are sent from all countries, and Latin is their
Esperanto. It is, in fact, mainly to give them a thorough knowledge
of this secret law that they are sent to Rome, for it is not taught
in the education of ordinary priests, and not one in 100,000 of the
zealous laymen (Knights of Columbus, etc.) who help the priests 
knows anything about it.

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               14

                    THE VATICAN'S LAST CRIME

     But you may be sure that the priestly writers, who tell
America about the beautiful harmony of Church Law and American Law
know all about it. The chief manual of it, Father Marianus de
Luca's Institutiones Juris Ecclesiastici Publici is in every
seminary. It is not one of those Yellow and dusty tomes that are
considered too valuable to open every day but a modern book,
published by the Vatican in the present century. It has a
particularly warm letter of authorization from Leo XIII, the great
"democratic Pope," though about ten pages of it are devoted to
chastising priests who say that the Church his abandoned its "right
of the sword" or any other medieval claims. I have quoted
extensively from it elsewhere (Appeal to Reason Library, No.1), and
you can spend a pleasant hour comparing the nice sentiments which
Catholics quote for you from Pope Leo's inspiring Encyclicals with
the sentiments he endorses in Marianus de Lucas book.

     In fact, it comes a little closer to Americans. A more recent
but equally truculent manual of this Public Church Law is Cardinal
Lepicier's De Stabilitate et Progressu Dogmatis, Lapicier is a
Canadian, the oracle of the Canadian Catholics. So white priests in
Detroit were getting round Henry Ford and the American public with
stories of how Thomas Aquinas and the Jesuit Suarez laid down our
most modern principles of political morality centuries ago, and how
the Pope is the incorruptible protector of democracy, justice, and
freedom of conscience, other priests just across the river, were
chuckling over Lepicier. Perhaps they were also in Detroit.

     From the ease with which the American public were duped in
this matter one would imagine that Quebec is an obscure place round
Hudson's Bay or in Greenland. Quebec is, under Church law, a
Fascist state. It is the only free country -- if you can call it
free -- in the world where Petain's miserable senile corruption of
our civilization is hailed with joy and admiration instead of
curses and derision.

     A few years ago a Canadian Journalist, Grant Dexter, had an
article in the London press (News-Chronicle, August 18, 1938) with
the title "There is Fascism under the British Flag," and it opened
with the words: "The facts about Quebec are not in dispute; Church
and State are combining in an effort to suppress freedom and to
create a Fascist State on the Italian model." Dexter might have
said that there has always been Fascism in French Canada. When the
British took it over from the French the clergy made with them one
of the usual selfish deals; they would stamp out revolt in the
people if the British would give them tyrannical rights and powers
over the people. I found the place a paradise of sleek priests,
monks and nuns in 1925, but it has become much worse just when the
British Empire was getting up its courage to "rid the world of
Fascism." Under the new "Padlock Law" (1937) against Communism,
which means anything the priests don't like and was directly
inspired by the present Pope, the police became gestapo. They can
invade and close premises and arrest men without appeal to the
Courts. The censorship is tyrannical, and Protestants and Jews who
have nothing to do with Communism are persecuted. In 1940 a
respectable girl of sixteen was sentenced to jail (or a heavy
payment) for distributing tracts of the International Bible
Students' Association.


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               15

                    THE VATICAN'S LAST CRIME

     To these French Canadians -- and they are four out of the 12
million people of Canada -- Franco Spain is an idyllic land, and
Vichy France is making a noble effort to reach its level. Salazar
in Portugal and Horthy in Hungary are ideal rulers, and Mussolini's
sale to the Pope of the liberties which the Italian people had won
with their blood was a grand victory over the materialism of the
age. That this encouraged Hitler and his gang, led directly to the
rape of Ayssinia, and had a considerable influence on the Vatican's
alliance with Japan is -- well, it is just one of those things.

     How American priests and their writers and politicians were,
while these sentiments were rampant in canada, assuring the
American public that the Church stood inflexibly for democracy and
freedom we shall consider presently, but we must notice here one
very ironic occurrence. In 1929 the papers announced with great joy
that Mussolini and the Pope had entered into a Holy Alliance. They
did not recall that Mussolini had recently said, or roared out on
a public platform, that he had "marched to victory over the rotting
corpse of liberty." They did not mention that he had 10,000
political prisoners in jail, many under torture. They said nothing
to disturb the soothing assurances of Catholic writers, even of Al
Smith during his presidential campaign, that it was only when the
founders of our liberties "wedded themselves to ancient Catholic
political principles that they were able to give birth to modern
democracy as we know it." Shades of Franklin and Jefferson!
However, just when Catholic mendacity of this sort was given place
of honor in the American press the Pope himself was angrily tearing
it to tatters in Italy.

     Mussolini had bluntly declared in the Italian Camera
(Congress) that he had made no concession to medievalism, and the
Pope retorted at once, in an open letter to his Cardinal Secretary
of State which was published in the Vatican organ, the Osservatore
Romano (May 30, 1929), that in accepting the Canon Law (Public
Church Law) for Italy the Duce had conceded everything. The Pope,
exactly on the lines which I have described above said that
Mussolini had admitted the thesis that the Church is a "perfect
society" and he must accept "the logical and juridical consequences
of such a situation according to constitutive [Church] law."

     We saw what these consequences are. Naturally the Pope did not
dare assert his "right of the sword" or his duty to put apostates
to death. It would have meant a claim for the execution of about
20,000,000 Italians; and, in spite of the Catholic censorship,
those blamed Americans might have heard of it. He could not demand
the suppression of every other religion, because the Americans and
British had chapels and missions in Italy, but he insisted on
severe restrictions, complained bitterly that it was only the
pressure of circumstances that forced him to make any concession,
and secured at least that the civil law would deal with any free or
critical discussion of religion. He did point out that one
consequence of recognizing that the Church is a perfect society is
that it is "absolutely superior to the State": another is that "in
matters of conscience the Church and the Church alone has competent
authority;" another that this particularly applies to "the matter
of propaganda" and criticism of the Church: another that "the full
and perfect right to educate does not belong to the State but the 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               16

                    THE VATICAN'S LAST CRIME

Church": another that "in a Catholic State liberty of conscience
and of discussion must be understood and carried out in accordance
with Catholic teaching and law"; another, referring to the Catholic
scheme of controlling marriage, that the Church "can and must
enforce it."

     From the viewpoint of the man who wants to know the truth
about the relation of Catholic law to civil law, who wants to
examine whether the Church is really democratic or Fascist, this is
the most important and most explicit document that has emanated
from the Vatican for fifty years. But no American or British paper
reproduced it; and even the Catholic who wants to read his own
Pope's words on the subject will find that he would have to read
them in my books or one of Marshall's -- which he is forbidden
under pain of hell to open! Remember what Heywood Broun, a
journalist of knowledge and character, said about the Catholic
censors of the Press: "There is not a single New York editor who
does not live in terror of this group,"

     One of the aims of this general intimidation of editors or of
newspaper owners by threats to withdraw Catholic advertisers or
readers is to protect the Catholic-American fiction that the Church
never interferes in polities. The Vatican, we are told, cooperates
at one time with a democratic state and at another with a Fascist
state because it leaves to the people the choice of its political
form. It must cooperate with the established state in protecting
the interests of religion. Did not the great Pope Leo XIII
formulate that principle in golden words which have been reproduced
so many hundreds of times that there is no excuse for any writer
who does not know it?

     We smile. Until 1939 the assurances of Hitler and Mussolini
that they ardently desired peace in Europe were reproduced just as
many hundreds of times. And the Catholic writer who quotes the
Encyclical (Immortale Dei) of Leo XIII as a sublime utterance on
"The Constitution of Christian States" and the freedom of people to
shape their own constitutions is no more honest than Hitler or
Mussolini. The very title given to it in the English translation is
a trick. The Pope's title is "On the Constitution of Catholic
States." A few other neat little changes conceal the fact that the
aim of it was almost the exact opposite of what Catholic writers in
America pretend. It was addressed to France, and its chief object
was to chastise the French for daring to choose a constitution
which put all religions on the same level by excluding the Catholic
Church from polities, the lawcourt, and the school: which is just
what the American Constitution does. The Encyclical was written in
1885, and the French people had then lived under a Republic for
fourteen years. The Papacy had during all that time refused to
recognize the political form which they had chosen in a free
Congress and with the full support of the country. Leo XIII, who
never interfered in politics, had stubbornly insisted that they
must take back either the royal or the imperial family.

     The whole Catholic propaganda on this point is nauseating in
its dishonesty. The world does not need a Pope to tell it that a
nation can choose its own political form, and the Pope forgot this
Catholic principle when the Spaniards set up a Republic in 1932. It


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               17

                    THE VATICAN'S LAST CRIME

is not the business of a moralist, however richly oiled he may be,
to dictate on such matters as choosing between a royalist and
republican form. But if there is any such thing as political
morality or principle in public affairs, the Fascist form of a
state, being imposed upon a people by force, does concern it. And
when those who have imposed it are corrupt adventurers like Hitler,
Mussolini and Franco, or senile splutterers like Petain, when they
lie and cheat like medieval Popes and princes, when they debauch
their people with sentiments of banditry and commit outrages on a
vast scale, it is time for the Pope, to speak out. Yet, while
statesmen all over the world who do not claim to be "holy men"
loathe and execrate them, the Pope enters into alliance with them.
He has a concordat with every Fascist ruler in Europe and South
America, but he goes far beyond that.

     Does the Catholic apologist mean that men in power, no matter
how criminal they may be, must be taken into alliance if they
promise to protect and promote "the interests of religion"? What
interest of religion, in the best sense, can such men promote? And
what are their promises worth? A man's principles are suspect if he
deals with them, but his intelligence is worse than suspect.
Religion in such a case obviously means the power and wealth of the
Papacy and the Catholic hierarchy, And it will be shown
overwhelmingly in this series of booklets that for the last ten
years or more the Black International has intrigued with the powers
of darkness in its own interest and condoned every outrage and
deception that prepared the way for this ghastly crime against
humanity.

                           Chapter IV

                   HOW THE CRIME WAS ORGANIZED

     Aggressive war was always barbaric. Priests reserve the
richest section of their vocabulary of vituperation (loathsome,
swinish, filthy, obscene, bestial, etc.) for the man who loves a
woman without their blessing, but they have always contrived to
keep their dignity when they condemn aggressive war. They know that
whenever their own nation enters upon one they will support it. Yet
it is a crime on so vast a scale that no individual crime can for
a moment be compared with it.

     It was always a relic of barbarism. Today it stinks. There
used to be, and still in defensive war are features -- a superb
courage, a heroism, a self-sacrifice for others, a splendid
challenge to our common cowardice -- that have moved quite
respectable writers to praise it. Sir Arthur Keith, one of the most
kindly And most humane of men, said some years ago that war is
necessary. He could not say that today. Modern aggressive war,
Fascist war, the war launched by the men who mouth about their
invincible legions, their indomitable courage, their noble blood,
is an incarnation of cowardice. What is called the Age of Chivalry
in European history is a Catholic lie. Historical experts -- not
writers of manuals of general European history for American
colleges -- consider the period (1100-1400) one of the most brutal,




                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               18

                    THE VATICAN'S LAST CRIME

dishonest, treacherous, and aggressively sexual in the chronicle of
civilization. What we see today is not a decay of chivalry but 
precisely a return to the so-called Age of Chivalry, with certain
diabolical improvements (from the bandit's angle).

     You prepare the way for your war by years of lying, cheating,
corrupting, prostituting your women, seducing soldiers and
statesmen, and buying traitors and Fifth Columnists. Meantime you
forge your weapons in underground arsenals. When you are ready, you
look round the map for the weakest victim, and you bear down upon
him with a force four or five times as great as his. You shelter
your men behind an advancing war of steel. You drive hundreds of
thousands of frantic women and children and old men along the roads
before them, knowing that your enemy is less inhuman than you and
it will paralyze his defense. You pour hell upon the towns where
the women and children and old men live so as -- this is laid down
in German and Japanese military manuals -- to take the heart out of
their husbands or sons in the field, and you then announce that you
have bombed their "military installations." You flood them with
poison gas -- unless you learn that they have enough to retaliate
A your cities . . . In a word, it stinks. And the Black
Internationals, the Pope and his cardinals, archbishops, bishops,
priests, monks, nuns, and paid journalists and organizers, have for
ten years or more cooperated with the arch-criminals who have
brought this blight upon civilization. They have done more. They
have summoned the bandits to the foul work and called it a Crusade.

     Now that, you say, is really too strong. But is any man really
ignorant that the present Pope raised the cry, years before the war
started, before we heard those first shots in Spain which were the
curtain-raiser of the great tragedy, that the powers must unite to
"extinguish Bolshevism in Spain, Mexico, and Russia," and that the
cry was taken up by the whole Catholic world? How did Catholic's
think that Bolshevism was going to be extinguished? With rose-
water? Seldes is very frank in his work The Vatican about the way
in which the Knights of Columbus joined the Wall Street Choral
Society in demanding war upon Mexico, that is to say, of course,
upon its Bolshevism, though it hasn't got any. Is a war less
criminal when the defender is incomparably weaker than the
aggressor? Profane moralists think otherwise. Has any man now any
serious doubt that the Pope encouraged Franco to rebel and the
Italians and Germans to assist him? As to Russia, Pacelli, who is
now Pope Pius XII, has howled for the extinction of its Bolshevism,
and in particular has appealed to Germany to allow him to cooperate
in this, in explicit terms since 1936 and implicitly long before
that. Crushing Bolshevism in Russia meant, as we now see and as any
properly informed man could have foreseen, the bloodiest war in
history.

     If, as one can hardly suppose, a man has any doubt about this
charge against the Black International, he will get ample
information in the following books. We shall, in fact, see all
about Pacelli Pius in the next book. But proofs meet the eye every
day. Why do you suppose that the head of the Roman Church in
Britain, Cardinal Hinsley, has warned Catholics to be prepared for
terrible propaganda against the Church when the war is over? Why is
Archbishop Mannix, the head of the Church in Australia, permitted 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               19

                    THE VATICAN'S LAST CRIME

to make such attacks on the British effort to extinguish Nazism,
that on the latest count, only 16 percent of the Australian
volunteers are Catholics and 65 percent Protestants? Why do
international radio experts complain in England (News-Chronicle,
August 21, 1941) that Italian broadcasters address English
Catholics "as if they were a ready-made Fifth Column"? Why does the
Vatican radio find it necessary repeatedly to meet the charge that
the Pope is pro-Axis? Why does it denounce as traitors to the
Church Polish and other officials who adhere to the Anglo-Russian
alliance? Why do those servile followers of the Vatican, Franco and
DeValera, help Germany? What about the Pope's latest pet scheme, a
Catholic bloc to be formed with the help of Germany?

     But this booklet must be a preliminary general survey. The
plot will be shown and proved in detail in the following booklets,
and on the most positive evidence. It is sometimes difficult, even
impossible, to prove the Vatican's share in international intrigues
and crimes. Catholicism is not the same thing in America as in
Italy. It is a minority Catholicism and most behave very prudently.
Sometimes American Catholics tell you, when you point out the
irrepressible absurdities and eccentricities of their Church, that
you "ought to see it in a Catholic country." You may be sure these
men have never seen it themselves in Eire, Spain, Italy, and
Poland. In these countries Catholics can from long familiarity see
and hear without raising an eyebrow things that would make an
American Catholic pale. Very often, in fact, they are kept in
complete ignorance of what the Vatican is doing in their own
country with its underground diplomacy and secret agreements, and
the apologist flatly denies these things -- until they come to
light years later.

     What do you think of this choice specimen? In the years when
Britain obstinately refused Home Rule to Ireland there was very
serious trouble, and it was often said, and angrily denied, that
the Vatican secretly negotiated with the British Government to use
the influence of the priests to cheek the people in return for
concessions in England. The Irish leaders knew that it was true. I
have myself heard John Dillon in the last century exclaim: "I take
my religion from Rome but not my polities." It all came out in the
official biography of Leo XIII by Msgr. T'Serelaes, but it had an
ironic sequel which American papers have probably not noticed. The
British statesmen and the Catholic lords never thought that in the
end the Vatican would double-cross them, but it did. The Irish
Press, a staunch Valerist paper, said in an editorial in its issue
of May 26, 1933:

          Today Ireland learns for the first time one of the most
     moving and glorious stories in connection with the Easter Week
     Rising [1916]. Before it took place Pope Benedict XIV received
     a mission from the Irish Volunteer Executive in the person of
     George Noble, Count Plunkett. The Count had a private audience
     of two hours with His Holiness and disclosed to him the
     decision to rise and the date of the insurrection and received
     from him his Apostolic Benediction on the men who were facing
     death for Ireland's liberty.




                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               20

                    THE VATICAN'S LAST CRIME

     You may admire the pathetic rebellion or you may think it
foolish in its plain futility. You may acknowledge the right of
rebellion yet feel that these secretly organized revolts, when a
country is engaged in a terrible war, are not pleasant to
contemplate. But the only point of interest here is that if we had
suggested at the time that the Papacy was in any way involved in
the movement we would have raised a storm of indignation. Yet it
was not simply involved. The Pope outwardly friendly with the
British, gave his most solemn encouragement to the enterprise by
giving it his Apostolic Benediction. Now that De Valera has got all
that he expects to get out of England he reveals the truth.

     Should we be unduly suspicious we suggested that the Vatican,
through the Catholic hierarchy, encouraged De Valera to refuse the
use of ports to Britain and so prolonged the carnage of seamen and
the brutality of the Nazi regime? Especially when we have the heads
of the hierarchy in Australia publicly threatening what the Church
will do if Britain forces a temporary occupation; especially when
De Valera, Franco, Salazar, and Weygand (who would grant the
Germans the use of ports tomorrow if they were more confident of
its final victors) are abjectly amenable to Papal direction. We
remember how Leo XIII's clerical biographer boasts of the
cleverness of his hero in making deals with Prussia at the expense
of the Poles, which was denied at the time, just as he boasts of
his diplomatic intrigues in London at the expense of the Irish. We
remember how American Catholics raged when Pegler in one of his
syndicated articles accused the Vatican of supporting Japan. Now
the Pope receives Matsuoka in great honor at the Vatican and gives
that arch-hypocrite a gold medal.

     But do not get a false impression. This exposure of the plots
of the Black International will not at any point rely on
suspicions. It is based on such positive evidence is I have just
given of the Irish plot. The only suggestion or suspicion I
introduce is that the plot most probably goes far beyond what we
can at present prove. That is a plain inference from the historic
way in which Vatican intrigues are angrily denied at the time and
later revealed or -- as is the case with the Japanese alliance --
indignantly denied by American priests and at the same time claimed
by French and Italian priests as proof of the Pope's cleverness.
The known facts, the Pope's published words and actions, are,
however, grave enough and, in view of the criminality of the Axis
plot against the world, the infamy of the way in which it was
organized, the bestiality with which it has so far been carried
out, they make a mockery of what Catholic apologists have said in
America for half a century.

     Let us first be quite clear on this organization of the plot;
and this I particularly recommend to men and women of fine
sensitivity who are tempted to say that the whole world has somehow
apostatized from its ideals. Three nations only want aggressive
war: three nations out of fifty, or one-tenth only of the race.
Another tenth (backward people) know nothing about it, but eight-
tenths loath aggressiveness and the brutality it causes. Don't
blame the world.




                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               21

                    THE VATICAN'S LAST CRIME

     Even in the case of Germany, Italy, and Japan, the nation is
not so much corrupt as corrupted by a minority; and this corruption
was accomplished in ten years and can, by a reversal of the
educational machinery, be redeemed in less than ten years. Nations
like France and Spain may seem under Vatican influence to have
adhered to the corrupt gangs, but we know that the majority are
sound and when the time comes for the final and drastic,
destruction of this clerical influence they will rise to greater
heights than ever.

     The second point to hold clearly in mind is that it is a
military-economic plot. It appeared first in Japan, where a score
of very wealthy families wanted more wealth and hundreds of others
wanted to reach the same position. Fortunately for them Japanese
naval and military commanders are still at the medieval or Samurai
level of mentality. They want to win "glory" by conquering half of
Asia. The miserable politicians and the heads of the Shinto and
Buddhist religions were bought -- literally -- to support the plot,
and the Vatican promised that if it were given a monopoly of the
Christian missions it would see that the Gospel was accommodated to
this noble design of exploiting the slave labor and vast resources
of China, indo-China, Thailand, etc!. In Germany the economic
element precedes the military, as it had to create the army afresh,
and in the case of Italy we will not venture to speak of military
"glory." In sum, the world is darkened by a plot of two nations to
create a vast wealth by exploiting all the other nations. Italy was
never seriously meant to share it. Mussolini ought to have paid
more heed to Hitler's emphatic statement in Mein Kampf twenty years
ago that there is no room in Europe for two great powers.

     The third point to keep clear is that Mussolini and Hitler had
not at first any idea of the ultimate plot. Mussolini, a brutal,
scatter-brained adventurer, was too busy breaking the heads of
Socialists with whom he had quarrelled, to write programs, and
Hitler just put together a few Christian Socialist ideas
(especially anti-Semitism) and the already familiar demand that all
sections of the German-speaking race must unite. Add the spice of
denouncing Versailles, though it had treated Italy far too
generously. How these mob leaders and saloon-bar politicians came
to have definite and rapidly expanding programs is a long story
that will, as far as, is necessary, be told in later booklets. In
a word, it was due to the adoption of the parties by the
capitalists, who in time saw an opportunity of acquiring amazing
wealth by enslaving Europe, Asia, and Africa; the majority of the
workers, who were diverted from dreams of dispossessing their own
wealthy to a dream of taking England's lucrative place as "the
world's shopkeeper"; the army, which is always ready to "conquer"
when you give it the tools; the Churches in each country and the
Vatican for the whole world.

     The question that will interest the future historian is, as I
said, not how the plot grew, which it is very easy to trace, but
how the rest of the world was so duped that it made no defensive
preparations, except the futile Maginot Line in France. Again there
can be only one answer. The world was duped by its statesmen and
its rich newspaper-owner who refused to see anything except that
privilege would be saved by the extinction of Bolshevism in Italy, 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               22

                    THE VATICAN'S LAST CRIME

Spain, Germany, China and Russia. These are large questions to
which a full answer will be Provided in the later booklets, but
most people will remember how the press of America and Britain (and
France) was filled for years with (1) lying stories of the
confusion and inefficiency into which Socialism had led Italy,
Germany, Spain, and Russia; (2) lying, stories of the efficiency of
the Nazi and Fascist regimes; (3) sympathy with the pressure of
population in Italy and Germany, though everybody knew that
Mussolini and Hitler were forcing the birth rate, and every expert
knew that there was far less pressure than in England or Belgium.

     To what extent statesmen and editors and heads of Churches
really fooled themselves into thinking that the vast armaments
which Hitler and Mussolini were creating would be allowed to rust
when they had crushed Bolshevism in Spain and Russia as well as
their own countries is not my concern. Perhaps you remember how a
few years ago an French journalist in an interview (arranged for
the purpose,) asked Hitler about his emphatic statement in Mein
Kampf that France would be ground to powder, when he airily brushed
it aside as an ebullition of younger days -- it was still printed
in every edition on a score of pages. -- the press everywhere gave
prominence to his assurance; and the same press everywhere, with a
few honorable exception's, repeated every lie and libel about
Soviet Russia that anybody cared to send in.

                            Chapter V

                     HOW UNCLE SAM WAS DUPED

     The verdict of this generation of young folk, when they grow
up, will be that the "Guilty Men" -- journalists use that language
at last, forgetting that editors were as guilty as statesmen -- who
let the monstrous evil attain such proportions are only a little
less guilty than the bandits. In this respect I approach death with
clean hands. In my Haldeman-Julius publications for the last six
years, especially the Appeal to Reason Library, and the ABC
Library, and The History of the World Since 1918, I have thoroughly
exposed the current untruths, described the growth of the plot, and
made clear the true attitude of the Roman Church. This attitude and
the work of American Catholic apologists in falsely representing it
are the last point to be noticed in this introductory booklet.

     The New York Times of May 12, 1940, contained a very special
apology for the Vatican by Dr. Ryan, Catholic bishop of Omaha. That
paper has, as many quotations in these booklets will show, given us
a fair news-service both from the Vatican and Russia, and it was
right to publish the Catholic case. Ryan, formerly head of the
Catholic University, is the fifteen-inch gun, the 50-ton tank, of
American Catholic apologetic on these matters. His strength is,
besides his Catholic learning, that he is so solemn that he always
gives you the impression that he believes what he says. Even when
in the course of this article he says that today "the place of
Papacy in world affairs seems to stand out in bolder relief than at
almost any other epoch of its long existence," he is quite serious,
though he cannot possibly refer to the Vatican's share in the
world-plot.



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               23

                    THE VATICAN'S LAST CRIME

     Dr. Ryan's complete vindication of the wisdom and the
integrity of the Papacy is this. In the last century it fought
"political liberalism." This is now dead and "on its ruins there
have risen such extremes as communism and fascism" which "meet on
the common ground of state totalitarianism." Against these new
dragons the Papacy steps out again in shining armor, and they "have
thrown down the gauntlet to Catholicism," which cannot possibly
"capitulate to the new theories," Thus "the democratic regimes"
have no stouter champion than the Pope, and all Americans must
rally to him.

     Two months later, when the pious and purblind Petain trampled
on the last remnants of democracy in France, the Papal newspaper,
the Osservatore Romano (July 8), hailed his restoration of "the
principle of authority" with enthusiasm and Said that in this
respect "the aims of the dictatorships coincided with those of the
Church." What the leading Catholic apologist felt when the same New
York Times (July 19) gave the gist of this Papal article one
wonders. The Osservatore quoted its pet dictator Salazar saying:
"The authoritarian regimes have the purpose of creating a civic
conscience as a way to create a moral conscience", and in the name
of the Pope added: "Such are also the desire, the aspiration, and
the program of the Church." And the Times Rome correspondent, went
on to say that the Germans rejoiced at this "complete about-face by
the Vatican in its position toward totalitarian states!" You see,
the terrible case with which Germany crushed Holland, Belgium, and
France had convinced the Pope that it was going to win the war; and
from that time onward the Vatican's one great idea was to set up a
bloc of totalitarian Catholic States in cooperation with Hitler.

     Pity the poor American apologist in these days. But Ryan's
plea was gross even at the time. In the last century, he begins,
the Church fought political liberalism. Yes, at a cost of half a
million lives of Liberals and with such documents as its moth-eaten
Syllabus. Political liberalism means simply democracy, sol the
Church fought democracy, which Ryan has always denied. Other
apologists prefer to say "economic liberalism" but they obviously
do not know what they are talking about because the Church joined
with economic liberalism in a violent attack upon its opposite,
Socialism. This political liberalism is now "defunct," Ryan says.
Yes -- in all Catholic countries. As we saw, nine-tenths of the
Pope's subjects live under a Fascist flag, and the Pope presses
upon them as the political ideal the totalitarian regime of Italy
and Portugal. It is upon Protestant lands that the Crusade for
democracy and against Fascism vitally depends. And Ryan's final
point that the principles of the Catholic Church compel it to fight
for democracy and freedom is even worse. If it were true, the
Vatican is guilty of a monstrous moral apostasy. But it is the
reverse of the truth. We have seen that the Church of Rome is
Fascist in its Constitution, its law, its principles, and
everything about it. It coquetted -- cocotted might be better --
with democracy as long as it paid.

     The recent history of Vatican policy -- it has no "principles"
in the ordinary sense -- is not obscure. It was fiercely anti-
democratic, until the last quarter of the last century. It still
remained anti-democratic, expressing this plainly in its relations 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               24

                    THE VATICAN'S LAST CRIME

with France, until near the end of the century. It insulted and
humiliated the heads of the Catholic Church in America by
addressing to them an Open Letter, published all over the world,
condemning what is called Americanism. What it condemned was
precisely what Ryan and other apologists teach: that there is no
lack of harmony in any respect between the spirit and law of the
Church and the American spirit and law But the "century ended with,
apparently, the triumph of political liberalism all over the world,
and the Vatican ceased its mumbling. On political matters it became
ideally neutral; and the Church in America began to store up
billions of dalliers while the Church in France and Italy shrank,
so much that its contributions to the treasury were meager. One
must keep an eye on these Americans.

     Then began the golden age of Catholic propaganda in America.
The Church, they said, was essentially democratic; always had been
in fact. The apologists grew bolder and bolder. Not only is the
eternal political truth in the Encyclicals (slightly retouched) of
Leo XIII (who hated democracy) but it was now discovered in the
writings of the Jesuit Suarez (who would have had a man burned at
the stake for professing it) and even in the works of Thomas
Aquinas (who had picked a few ancient Greek ideas out of the works
of Aristotle but otherwise defended the most merciless principles
of medieval clerical tyranny). The flag of freedom had been first
set up in Catholic Maryland; which, Bancroft had clearly shown,
never had more than a Catholic minority, and these had passed the
policy of toleration in their own defense.

     Year after year American Catholic writers and journals
broadcast this monumental untruth, but the Vatican itself was
meantime watching for the first opportunity to get rid of its
misalliance with the vulgar drab Democracy and recover its
association with its elegant Aristocracy. Ryan says: "Political
liberalism and not the Papacy was almost completely destroyed in
the cataclysm of the World War." He ventures to say that in one of
the best-informed countries in the world! Just think for yourself,
for no reading is necessary in order to test this.

     Democracy was not destroyed in Russia, for it had never had
democracy. It was not destroyed but for the first time set up in a
pure form, by getting rid of Kaiserism and the Junkers, in Germany.
It was not in the least weakened, but invigorated by the collective
war-effort in America, the British Empire, France, Italy -- in
fact, all over the world except in Japan. Oh, Ryan will say, I take
a long view; I see Communism already growing. We will not press his
language -- that democracy was destroyed in the World War -- but we
reply that he is using one of the flimsiest tricks of propaganda.
Outside Russia, where the conditions were unique, Communism, which
must be taken in this connection to mean the dictatorship of the
proletariat, never had a chance of attaining power. Bela Kun was an
episode. What did show a prospect of gaining the world was
Socialism, and it is the only pure form of democracy. But the
Catholic apologist, like his colleagues as fellow-crusaders in Wall
Street, finds it more useful to say Communism. They could never
have made America quite so red-hot about Socialism.




                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               25

                    THE VATICAN'S LAST CRIME

     What are the facts? Dictatorship began first after the war in
Poland; and no government in the world was more subservient to the
Vatican than the Polish, no other nation so solidly Catholic. The
democracy began next in Spain where in 1923, the King and Church
had, to prevent an inquiry into their corruption, set up a
dictator. He had the blessing and cordial cooperation of the Pope.
Mussolini had marched on Rome in the previous year, but his
dictatorship was very imperfect -- as late as 1925 more than
2,500,000 or half the country voted against him -- until he came to
terms with and bought the support of the Vatican. This was in 1929.
During ten years after the war the only blows at democracy, which,
instead of being "defunct," as Ryan says, was as vigorous as ever,
had been dealt in Catholic countries with the warm support of the
hierarchy, and the Pope.

     In 1929 Pacelli-Pius became Secretary of State at the Vatican,
and democracy began to bleed. Japan started on China, (1931) and
the only power in the world to enter into close association with it
was the Vatican City. Germany still rejected Nazism, but in 1932
the Pope made an underhand deal with Hitler, and this was one of
the chief reasons why he won and destroyed democracy. In 1934
democracy was destroyed in Vienna, after Dollfuss had had an
interview with the Pope and with the zealous cooperation of the
Austrian hierarchy; and Mussolini, loudly cheered by the whole
Italian Church, entered Abyssinia. Next year (1935) Pacelli visited
South America, and the statesmen and generals who fawned upon him
made a bloody end of democracy. In 1936 Franco, with the Pope's
blessing, began his vile work in Spain, and the way was prepared
for the world-assault on democracy. It survives, fighting for its
life, in non-Catholic countries.

     That is the story we shall tell in detail, but that this is
the true outline of it everybody knows. The Church of Rome is
vitally implicated in the most criminal and most gigantic
conspiracy in history. It blesses or courts men to whom lying is a
pastime and wholesale murder and brutality are necessities which
they defend with amazing callousness. Perhaps it is the Vatican's
last crime, for when this war is over a grim reckoning will be
required of the Pope. He clings to his infamous association while
every sane and free part of the world covers it with obloquy.



                          ****     ****


    Reproducible Electronic Publishing can defeat censorship.


   The Bank of Wisdom is always looking for more of these old,
hidden, suppressed and forgotten books that contain needed facts
and information for today. If you have such books please contact
us, we need to give them back to America.


                          ****     ****



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               26

                        27 page printout
    Reproducible Electronic Publishing can defeat censorship.

          This file, its printout, or copies of either
          are to be copied and given away, but NOT sold.

          Bank of Wisdom, Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                          ****     ****
Edited by E. Haldeman-Julius

THE BLACK INTERNATIONAL         No. 2

              HOW THE POPE OF PEACE TRADED IN BLOOD

                          THE RED POPE
                        by Joseph McCabe

                  HALDEMAN-JULIUS PUBLICATIONS
                     GIRARD  -- : --  KANSAS
                          ****     ****

                            Chapter I

               THE RED RECORD OF THE HOLY FATHERS

     The color chosen by the Popes is White. Their flag, it is
true, White and Gold, to remind us that they are Kings and need a
royal revenue of a billion a year, but that is, they say, necessary
to a ruler of the world. Their personal color-theme is white, a
flowing white cassock and a white-silk skull-cap: symbols of their
purity life and purpose and their never-ceasing efforts to keep the
world in peace and tranquillity. The vast economic organization
over which they preside, the Black International, takes its name
from the black-garbed clergy. For more than a hundred years after
America had embodied the elementary rights, of man in a
Constitution the priests called the claim of those rights in other
countries Liberalism and waged a bitter, blood-soaked fight against
it. This was the historic battle of the Blacks and the Whites
(Liberals).

     Toward the end of the nineteenth century a new color, Red,
appeared in the arena. Whites and Blacks shuddered and got together
to oppress it. Red meant blood, violence, war. As I explained in
the last book, our folk are now educated in so false a version of
history, because truth is offensive to our Catholic fellow-
citizens, that few know the irony of this. Particularly in America
men and women were persuaded to greet the new banner with hatred,
rage, and disgust. These newcomers who preached violence, cruelty,
and war were outside the pale of our Christian civilization. Shoot
the dogs down, as Luther said about the rebel-peasants of his time.
Let me here just outline the historical evidence that the real
Reds, in this sense, are, and always have been, the Popes and their
bishops.

     We have read hundreds of times the prophecy of the famous
British essayist, Lord Macaulay that when in some remote age a
traveller comes from New Zealand to see the ruins of London the
Papacy will still flourish. These literary men! Not only does it
seem unlikely that New Zealand will ever support 5,000,000 people
but the idea that an institution which has lasted 1800 years will
last another few millennia, or even a century, is childish. In 

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               1

                          THE RED POPE

Macaulay's time the world was beginning to perceive that
institutions which appeared thousands of years ago probably had
their roots in ignorance. There were then twenty Kings in Europe.
A century later there were ten, and most of them looked nervously
upon a hostile world. In another ten years they will probably be
reduced to one.

     The Papacy is far more vulnerable than monarchy. As the
supreme head of the western half of Christianity it was established
about the middle of fifth century. It is quite literally what
Hobbes called it, "the ghost of the Roman Empire sitting upon the
grave thereof." As long as that Empire maintain civilization every
branch of the Church, east and west, scorned the Pope's
pretensions. But in a world of blind men the one-eyed man is king,
and Rome ruled the ruins. The Popes were masters of a that was so
debased that during the next seven centuries all Europe did not
produce one book that any but a bookworm now reads or raise one
building that any but an antiquarian would cross the street to
examine.

     The brilliant civilization which the Arabs meantime created in
Spain and Sicily at last awakened Europe from its hog-like
slumbers, and for the next eight centuries the power of the Popes
was based upon violence and bloodshed. A distinguished German
historian has estimated that their victims numbered more than
10,000,00 in 500 years. Certainly they numbered some millions.
Until the American and French Revolutions these were frankly called
Heretics. Then the world, under the lead of America, decided that
it was a crime to put men to death for religion, so they were
called Liberals, and the Church got half a million of them
liquidated. By the twentieth century civilization generally had
become Liberal so they were called Reds or Bolsheviks. Very few
people are taught in school -- except in those disreputable
Communist Schools -- that it is simply an historical truth that
their flag is "red with martyrs' blood."

     Is it credible that the Holy Fathers, clad in the symbols of
peace and purity, were guilty of these things? I recently published
in England a History of the Popes (1939) in which I could pay more
attention to the characters of the Popes than in my larger True
Story of the Roman Catholic Church (1930). Let me say shamelessly,
that I read the original authorities in Greek, Latin, Italian,
Spanish, German and French, and no Catholic has ever attempted to
answer any of my historical work. And I say, coldly, that these
Holy Fathers shed more blood in defense of their wealth and power
than all the other historic religions put together and that the
record of their vices is the worst in the whole history of
religion.

     There have been about 260 of these Vicars of Christ, as they
call themselves. It is difficult to tell the exact number because
in certain periods there were two or three truculently fighting for
the holy title. In the tenth century there were 30 in 100 years --
there have been only six in the last 100 years -- and it is
impossible to be sure how many were murdered by rivals. Let us say
that there have been 260. We know nothing about the character of
the great majority of these during the first thousand years of the 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               2

                          THE RED POPE

Christian Era. Catholic literature gives the title of martyr to
nearly every Pope to the year 310, though their most learned
historian, Duchesne, admits that only two were martyred. It gives
the title of Saint to all but one of them to the fifth century,
whereas we have definite information about only three of them, and
one of these (St. Victor) was at least shady, the second (St.
Callistus) was definitely a crook, and the third (St. Damasus) was
a forger, and an employer of murderous mobs and was charged under
the civil law with adultery. In short, of the 150 or so Popes about
whose characters we can be fairly sure at least 30 were sexually
loose men (six or seven of them sodomists) and about a dozen
murderers. Scores besides these were men of vile temper and great
cruelty; and most of them were guilty of simony, nepotism, and
protecting corruption.

     So put out of your mind the conventional gush about "venerable
heads of the great Church," and remember that even the best Popes
were terrible shedders of blood. The holiest of them all, Innocent
III, was responsible for about 500,000 victims in 18 years (1198-
1216). The question here is whether this is ancient stuff that
throws no light or has no bearing on the conduct of the Papacy in
modern times. That is what Catholics say and most people believe;
but you will not understand the situation today unless you realize
that the "Red Record" which is the title of this chapter, mainly
refers to the record of the Popes from the fall of Napoleon (1814)
to our own time.

     I said in the last booklet that during this period about
500,000 men, women, and children were done to death by the Church
and the feudal monarchs in alliance. With that disgusting meanness
to which the difficulties of their case drives them, Catholic
writers represent, and try to compel other writers and works of
reference to represent, these martyrs as a sort of early type of
Reds, or dangerous agitators against the social order as well as
religion. On the contrary they were as a rule less radical than
Washington and Jefferson. Republicanism was rare amongst them, and
the had no idea of persecuting the Church or, even in most cases,
of disestablishing it. They were just men and women who wanted
kings to govern them constitutionally and the Church to suppress
the horrible Inquisition and its vile dungeons. For this Kings and
Popes fell upon them, through the armies, police, and fanatical
mobs, with incredible savagery.

     Do not listen to the excuse that it was still the Middle Ages.
Napoleon had made an end of that horror. Some now put Napoleon on
a level with our modern dictators, but with all his faults he was
a clean fighter, only in one case accused of murder (the Duc
d'Enghien), and he did magnificent work for Europe. He was a
skeptic, of course, as Lord Rosebery shows in The Last Phase
(1900), but he showered wealth and favor upon the Church -- on the
usual terms: the priests must keep the old Republicans quiet for
him. Yet after his fall the bishops joined with the royalists in a
White Terror which was more brutal than the Red Terror.

     Catholics represent Pope Pius VII as a "martyr" under
Napoleon. They do not tell how under this Pius VII, when Napoleon
was beaten, tens of thousands of Liberals were martyred and under 
his three successors hundreds of thousands. Well, what were these 

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               3

                          THE RED POPE

Holy Fathers, of modern times, like, and what were they protecting?
If you want a serious and unchallengeable answer look up that
highly respectable and most weighty authority the Cambridge Modern
History (Vol. X). You will find that Leo XII, who succeeded Pious
-- the Carbolic Encyclopedia admires his "intelligence and masterly
energy" -- was a converted rake and a doddering old fool who was
"hated by all, princes and beggars" (as the famous historian L. von
Ranke who knew him, said) and his death was hailed by the Romans
"with indecent joy" (the Prussian ambassador at Rome said). While
he shot birds in the Vatican garden his troops, with a sanguinary
cardinal in command, shot down his rebels, and many thousands of
them suffered a living death in jails of a repulsive character.

     At his death the cardinals, after invoking the light of the
Holy Spirit, elected, to meet the grave problems of the new Europe
a man in the last stage of senile decay, drooling at the mouth as
they wheeled him round the Vatican garden in his baby-carriage. The
carnage of rebels went on. He soon died, and the fierce contest of
cardinals for the holy office was renewed. The ablest candidate
Albani, but he was so notorious a rogue that they thought the
heretics of England and Prussia might make ribald remarks if they
elected him Vicar of Christ, so they made him Secretary of State
(and real ruler of the Church) and elected a monk Gregory XVI.

     Gregory was according to all Italian historians vulgar,
sensual, and frivolous. As one of the more distinguished of them
says, he "absorbed himself in ignoble interests while the country
groaned under misrule." It was widely believed in Rome that he was
intimate with the wife of his valet, and he was notorious for his
love of strong wine and candy. His horrible jails were crammed with
rebels -- 6,000 at one time -- and the best blood of Italy was
poured out or driven abroad. His ignorance was weird. He refused to
admit even gas and railways into the Papal States, as if that meant
that the devil got his foot in the door.

     After fifteen years of this the cardinals elected what
Catholics call a Liberal Pope, Pius IX. But when he found that
Liberals wanted real freedom and a share in reforming his corrupt
kingdom he fled in disguise and called upon the Catholic powers to
kill his rebels for him. Then the jails were crammed again. In
Civita Veechia, which had once been enlivened by the orgies of
medieval Holy Fathers, rebels with a life-sentence were chained to
the wall and not released even for relieving themselves. So the
brutality continued until the Italians bought off the Pope's French
protectors and took over, with an overwhelming vote of the
inhabitants, the Papal Kingdom.

     What was this kingdom (the Papal States) which they had shed
so much blood to protect? There is no dispute amongst non-Catholic
historians, and some Catholic historian's agree, that it was "the
most corrupt, backward, vicious, and inept in Europe." The British
ambassador publicly declared it "the opprobrium of Europe." The
leading monarchs of Europe in 1832 publicly warned the Papacy --
which is now pressed upon us as the most profound and serene oracle
on political morality -- that unless it cleaned up its Augaean
stable they would clean it themselves. Rome was described by a
devout French priest as "the most hideous sewer that was ever
opened up to the eye of man;" and this is approvingly quoted by a 

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               4

                          THE RED POPE

Catholic historian in the Cambridge Modern History (X, 164) in
which all this is admitted. The real ruler or Secretary of State,
Cardinal Antonelli, who had been born in a peasant's hut, died
worth $20,000,000, and left a bastard daughter, the Countess
Lambertini clamoring for it.

     South Italy, the Kingdom of Naples, was virtually an extension
of the Pope's Kingdom in respect of Papal influence; and it
rivalled the Papal States in corruption and viciousness. Its
monarchs, the Pope's beloved sons, were veritable Neros. From 1790
to 1860 they slaughtered, sometimes with revolting barbarity, about
200,000 "Liberals." And since the Kings of Spain and Portugal were
just as servile to the Popes we are entitled to bring their
misdeeds also under the heading of the "moral influence" of the
Popes. Their "Butcher's bill" in 50 years was between 50,000 and
100,000. The savagery was so indiscriminate that no one can get
nearer to the truth.

     Well, well, the Catholic says, this is still ancient history
-- less than a century ago -- and with the glorious pontificate of
Leo XIII a new era was inaugurated; the era of those beautiful
encyclicals on socio-political matters which are quoted in every
Catholic apology that is put before the American public. For an
understanding of the present situation it is very important to
realize that there was no change of policy whatever at the Vatican.
That is why I have given this very slight outline of the bloody
history of the past, which is fully described in my earlier works.
The policy of violence was merely suspended until it could once
more be applied.

     Leo XIII could not, if he wanted, maintain the vile practices
of his predecessors. Italy and France witnessed a rapid growth of
skepticism in high quarters after 1870 and would not tolerate Papal
interference or advice. Poland was under Russia, which treated the
Pope as an Italian monkey. Austria, brought down by its defeats was
becoming very Liberal. The horrors of the dead Papal Kingdom and of
Naples were told by hundreds of writers and orators in Europe and
America. Moreover, the, Vatican had begun to see remarkable
possibilities of wealth in "converting", America and Great Britain,
and the Catholics in those countries had as yet not the least
influence on the press and education and could not have concealed
atrocities as they now do. So the wolf put on sheep's clothing for
a few years.

     Then the menace of the Reds began and gave them their
opportunity. There was still only one country in which the "right
to kill", which (we saw in the last book) was solemnly reaffirmed
by Leo XIII, could be made the basis of policy. Spain was
geographically isolated and few people abroad took much notice of
it. In fact, in the last decade of the century the ruling and
wealthy classes everywhere were beginning to sniff at this Red
menace and would not inquire too closely. So in Spain the
hierarchy, which was more intimately connected with Rome than that
of any other country, began to cooperate with the corrupt state on
the old lines. From 1895 to 1909, when Ferrer was murdered and I
roused so much public attention that the policy had again to be
suspended, hundreds of rebels were shot and thousands tortured in 
jail.

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               5

                          THE RED POPE

     They were not "anarchists." I became an intimate friend of one
of them, Professor Tarrida del Marmol, who fled to London and was
under sentence of death in Spain. He was a fine scholar and a
spanish gentleman of the best type, a man of aristocratic family.
loathed violence and was an anarchist only in the Tolstoian sense.
His great crime was that he was a rebel against the Church. In the
vile dungeons of Montjuich, where he was imprisoned, he saw what
was done. Men were fed for days on salt fish and dry bread and
refused water. Cords were tied tightly on their genitals. It was
afterwards proved that most of the "anarchist plots" were police
plots, and the Church was fully implicated. This want on under Leo
XIII and Pius X, and it brings the Red Record of the Popes down to
our own time. It continued in the only country in the world in
which it could be continued.

                           Chapter II

                      WHO IS THIS PIUS XII?

     The present Pope Pius XII, is hailed throughout the Catholic
world as the Pope of Peace. Cardinal Hinsley explains in his
introduction to The Pope Speaks (1940) that the beautiful motto of
his ancient and aristocratic family is (translated): "Peace is the
Fruit of Justice." Yes; Mussolini has said that hundreds of times,
with the accent on the word justice. Hitler merely wants justice
and then he will give what is left of us peace. I am going to show
that Pius XII above any other Pope of modern times, even Pius IX,
is entitled to be called the Red Pore, the Pope of War.

     One of the flatterers of "the venerable Church" has called him
"the Greatest Neutral." He never has been neutral. For at least
five years he has openly called for war on Bolshevism in Mexico,
Spain, China, and Russia. Does anyone suppose that he was thinking
of ancient Jericho and merely wanted the priests to blow their
trumpets? He was summoning Italy, Germany, Japan, and the United
States to war. Leaving out the United States, which was unwilling
to draw the chestnuts out of the fire for the Pope and Wall Street,
in this slogan which Pacelli, as Secretary of State, sent echoing
through the Catholic world he was shrieking for just that war on
Spain, China, and Russia which we have seen.

     I am sometimes asked what Catholic apologists reply to these
very serious historical and actual charges which I make. They never
reply. They forbid their people to read me, which is much easier.
But do not Catholics regard that maneuver with suspicion? Listen.
The Catholic Truth Society of Ireland published a cheap booklet by
the Jesuit priest D.A. Lord with the title I Can Read Anything. It
meets the natural wish of many Catholics to read both sides, and it
takes the usual line that the books they are forbidden to read are
filthy and mendacious but dangerously clever. Catholic young men
and women are asked to be too sensible to "pit their minds" against
"the trained, clever, brilliant minds" of the Church's critics. And
lest the Catholic should ask if the Church and its 350,000,000
followers does not include a few equally brilliant writers to reply
the priest goes on (p. 22)




                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               6

                          THE RED POPE

          And when they [the anti-Church writer's] are utterly
     unscrupulous, as let's say, Joseph McCabe is, and will twist
     any little bit of history to make a case, and pile yarn on
     yarn to construct a proof, and use fable for fact and
     supposition for solid argument, what chance has the average
     reader against them?

     The English Catholic Truth Society dare not publish this -- as
my friend Haldeman-Julitis shares the Jesuits' opposition with me
I gather that the book is of American origin -- because the British
libel courts are the straightest in the world. In an Irish court I
would get as much justice as a Jew in Berlin, So when folk in
England write to ask for the Catholic reply to me the officials
send them an address in Dublin where they can get this cowardly
little rag. Inquirers have reported this to me.

     If anybody is unaware, which hardly seems likely, that the
present Pope has for the last five or six years used all his
influence to get Italy, Germany, and Japan to make war,
respectively, on Spain, Russia, and China, which would mean a
world-war, he will have ample evidence later. First let us see how
this Red Pope became what he is.

     Eugenic Pacelli comes of what is commonly called an ancient an
Italian noble family which had lost its wealth but not its piety.
His father was a Papal lawyer and, as is usual in such cases, one
son was destined for the clerical career; especially as in the last
century government or military service was closed to good Catholics
in Italy, the Papacy still branding the government or the royal
family "robbers." More than four-fifths of the inhabitants of the
Papal States had voted to be transferred from Papal rule to that of
the Kings of Italy but that meant nothing to the "democratic" Leo
XIII. He was "the prisoner of the Vatican", eliciting golden
sympathy from America, and the Italian statesmen were robbers. So
careers for Catholic youths of noble birth and little money were
few in Italy.

     I do not suggest that Pius XII does not believe his theology,
as probably half the clergy do not in one degree or other. No one
is likely to know except himself what he believes. Priests hardly
ever tell each other. Zeal is no criterion, however. The Catholic
priesthood and hierarchy are an immense economic corporation
centered in Rome just as Christian Science is, in its official
framework, a business with headquarters in Boston. Naturally its
members are zealous; and the more responsibility they have (which
is won by the extent of their zeal) the more zealous they are. The
Catholic who imagines its Pope and his cardinals regarding money as
a mundane affair with which they have to soil their white fingers
occasionally should hear two or three priests talking about them
when they get to the second bottle.

     Here is some interesting information about the higher clergy
of Rome which came to me a few years ago from a priest through one
intermediary, a friend of high character. When Rome obliged English
Catholics a few years ago by making a Saint of witty old Thomas
More it sent them, to their stupefaction, a bill for $65,000
(costs) and of $20,000 for a little present to the Pope! This
present was a gold chalice which, as the price of gold rose, would 

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               7

                          THE RED POPE

be just a lump of pure gold worth about $50,000. The ceremonies at
Rome were a close monopoly of the Italians -- at least under
pressure they let one English priest hold a candle and charged him
$50 -- and every cardinal had his fixed price.

     But understand that I suggest nothing whatever about the
Pope's belief or unbelief. He has a job of work, and this was his
apprenticeship for it. In college he discovered an ability for
learning languages and a special zeal for learning Canon Law, so he
was drafted into the Secretariat of State very soon after he became
priest, and there he would find himself on the fringe of the
mysteries of Vatican diplomacy. He also, being of noble birth,
joined and became a professor in The Academy of Ecclesiastics of
Noble Birth of course, the less said about that the better in
America, where one has to protect the legend that all his life --
when the great ones of the earth kissed his ring during his tours
of the world, when he occupied a gorgeous suite in the Vatican as
Secretary of State, and even now that he sits on the golden throne
-- his one ardent desire was that he could become a humble parish
priest amongst the poor. He is an aristocrat to his finger-tips. He
loathes democracy. He doubles Leo XIII (in his crooked diplomacy)
and Innocent III (who virtually founded the Inquisition).

     Pacelli made such progress in the department that at the
comparatively early age of 41 he was sent out on a very important
mission. Pope Benedict XV, who had notoriously intrigued with the
Germans and the Austrians against the Italians, during the war
recollected that he was a Pope of Peace when, in 1917, it became
doubtful if the Germans would win. He then wanted to have the
world-prestige of bringing it to a close, and he sent Pacelli as
Nuncio (ambassador) with plans of peace to Germany. Pacelli was
announced as Nuncio to Bavaria, but within a week he was in Berlin
seeing the Chancellor. He even saw the Kaiser, who told him to take
his plans home because he was sure to win the war. Why doesn't the
Pope rather, he said, detach Italy from the Allies and link it with
Austria, as they are both Catholic countries? Because, said
Pacelli, there is a very strong patriotic movement in Italy in
favor of continuing the war led by a fiery young journalist named
Benito Mussolini. The Pope's biographers say that the Kaiser told
Pacelli to take no notice of "that scum" but to go ahead and detach
Italy from England. It is a neat little picture.

     The gaunt, grim, swarthy young Nuncio next year saw the fall
of the Kaiser and the riots in Munich. He met the "mob" with simple
heroism, of course -- in Catholic literature -- but the important
point is that this was the beginning of his knowledge and hatred of
the Reds. He remained in Munich until 1925, so he saw, with what
feelings he has not told us, the rise of a similar "scum" in
Bavaria and the comic-opera "March on Berlin," when Hitler made the
record run of his life -- backwards. In 1925 he was sent as Nuncio
to Berlin, and as this was the beginning of the best period in
recent German history, the five years of peace and comparative
prosperity under a Liberal-Socialist coalition, Pacelli must know
better than any man in Italy that the excuse which was later made
for Hitler in the world-press, the flattery under shelter of which
the Nazis created their formidable power, the plea that they had
saved Germany from chaos and distress, is a lie.


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               8

                          THE RED POPE

     As part of the evidence, if evidence is required, that Pius
XII has only one aim in all his policy -- not the peace of the
world but the power of the Church -- the twelve years he spent in
Germany are important. He acquired a thorough knowledge of German,
thought he speaks it (and French) with, a marked accent, and as far
as German affairs are concerned he has never been at the mercy of
bigoted And muddle-headed Vatican officials. He saw the years of
confusion after the War end in a working compromise and a new
Germany rising cheerfully from the ruins. Lamentable as the feud of
Communists and Socialists was, it was a domestic squabble and did
not seriously disturb the national economy after 1924; and the
Catholic Church had more freedom and prestige than ever. Pacelli
knows as little about economics as he does about history and
science, but at least he was intelligent enough to see, during his
four years in Berlin, that under a predominantly Socialist rule
Germany was making all the progress that could be expected with so
crippling a debt, and it was not internal confusion but its share
in the world-slumps and the cessation of fat loans from America and
Britain from the end of 1929 that led to the comparative distress
of 1930-32 of which the Nazis took advantage. We shall see that
Pacelli at one time (1934) in a fit of temper wrote the sharpest
condemnation of Hitler that ever came from a clerical pen, He
always loathed Hitler as a plebeian upstart and an apostate from
the Church, even when he was compelling the German bishops to bow
humbly before him and beg to be allowed to have a share in his
dirty work. But Hitler promised to make an end of Socialism, and
that-not (outside of Russia) Communism or Bolshevism -- is the Big
Bad Wolf in the eyes of the Vatican. Socialism has not only a
constant anti-Papal tradition, which will surprise nobody who knows
the facts I summarized in the last chapter, but to oblige its
wealthy supporters the Vatican has been compelled for half a
century to condemn it as immoral on the ground that private
ownership is a right based upon natural moral law.

     It was, however, not until Pacelli had left Germany that the
Nazis showed any prospect of ever attaining power, and he regarded
them as a vulgar and disorderly rabble led by a bunch of unsavory
apostates and "pansies." Three years later he would, as Secretary
of State, compel the proud German hierarchy, against their very
decided will, to greet Hitler as the Savior of Germany and the
White Hope of the Church, Let us remember, when we get to that
point in the next booklet, that Pacelli did not act from ignorance.
He was less innocent than Chamberlain. If he had any ability at all
-- and he has considerable ability -- he knew Germany thoroughly.
Will Catholics call it a wicked suspicion if we assume that this
observer of events, who lived eight years in Munich and four in
Berlin, had read Mein Kampf? He knew the program: the glorification
of the German race, the domination of Europe, the annexation of the
Ukraine, the massacre of the Jews, the annihilation of France -- in
a word, war on a stupendous scale. Catholics do not obtrude today
his intimate knowledge of Germany.

     He was recalled to Rome in the summer of 1929 while Germany
was still cheerfully recovering and the Catholics cooperated
amiably with the Socialists and Liberals. Pacelli had been head of
the diplomatic corps at Berlin. The French ambassador had the real
right to that position and the Papal ambassador no right. But the 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               9

                          THE RED POPE

Germans hated the French too much to let the honor fall to them. It
is another point to bear in mind about this pre-hitler Germany,
which Pacelli helped to ruin, that it genially tolerated a Papal
Nuncio at the head of the diplomatic corps and a Catholic
Chancellor in the Wilhelmsstragse. German Catholics had never
before seen such things.

     Pacelli's patron, the Secretary of State Cardinal Gasparri,
was now 80 years old and unfit for office. He seems to have marked
out Pacelli as his successor, and he brought him back to the
Vatican for a few months of final training. Even Catholic
literature is a little confused here. Pacelli became Secretary of
State, which is the highest position in the Church after that of
the Pope, in February, 1930. In 1931 a gossip-paragraph appeared in
the Italian press to the effect that it was expected in Rome that
the new Secretary of State was about to be dismissed and old
Gasparri reinstated. Clearly the old men were conspiring against
Pacelli, but the same Catholic writers who say that it was because
he was too lenient to Mussolini had already said that Gasparri had
always been in favor of alliance with that brutal adventurer. We
will return to the point in a moment, but it will be useful first
to run a cursory eye over the ten years' activity of Pacelli as
Secretary of State.

     He took up residence in the gorgeous suite of rooms, with
heavy gilt furniture and magnificent decorations, in the Vatican
Palace. Just at the time when the Pope and Mussolini, who had in
the previous year signed the infamous compact by which (in effect)
the Papacy undertook to condone all Mussolini's crimes in return
for $90,000,000 and a royal independence, had begun to quarrel
fiercely, as crooks are apt to do, over the bargain. Pacelli
smoothed out the quarrel, got the Duce to bend his knees in St.
Peter's, and got the Pope to have a cordial chat with him. So
Mussolini was safely launched on his bloody career.

     In the same year, 1931, Japan seized Manchuria and began to
debauch the Chinese. While all the world looked on with disgust at
the brigandage Pacelli accepted the overtures of Japan and the more
Japan advanced and became a menace to half the world, the
deeper Pacelli made the Vatican's alliance with the callous and
unscrupulous bandits. In 1932 Hitler made his supreme bid for power
and failed, and Pacelli then ordered the German hierarchy to
withdraw their opposition to him so that he secured power and enter
upon his career of blood.

     In 1934 Pacelli went to South America to preside at a
Eucharistic Congress and saw the heads of each "Republic and their
bishops; and by a remarkable coincidence, if you can think it that,
Fascism began to sweep the country, rebels against the Church went
to jail in tens of thousands, and the Germans and Italians in South
America entered upon their audacious plans. In the same year the
Christian Socialists of Austria, after their leaders visited the
Pope, treacherously crushed Socialism and prepared the way for
Hitler. In the same year Mussolini began the slaughter of Abyssinia
and the whole Italian Church made whoopee, and at the end the Pope
gave the Queen of Italy as Empress of Abyssinia Golden Rose, which
is the highest mark of Papal approval.


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               10

                          THE RED POPE

     In 1936 General Franco visited the Vatican, and his revolt,
which had the most open and solemn blessing of the Papacy, was the
first serious step of the Axis bregands in their projected
campaign. In 1938 Hitler annexed Austria with the full support of
the Austrian Church, which is one of the most docile to the Vatican
in the world. In the same year the Sudeten Catholics at one end of
Czecho-Slovakia and the Slovak Catholics at the other betrayed
their country and put Hitler in a position to defy the rest of
Europe and prepare for his insane attempt to dominate the world.

     A remarkable ten-year record for the Pope of Peace, the
Greatest Neutral, the Friend of Democracy, and the Black
International which carried out his instructions! That record we
have to examine in detail, proving it by public acts and published
utterances, and then to consider the Pope's first two years of
pontifical activity. But, as we go into detail, do not lose sight
of the fact that Pacelli-Pius's ruling idea throughout is "the
extinction of Bolshevism" by the peaceful bombs and bayonets of the
Germans, Italians, Japanese; to which, in furtherance of the work
of peace, he now wants to add the bombs and bayonets of Vichy
France, Franco Spain, Salazar Portugal, and Horthy Hungary.

                           Chapter III

                   HIS GLORIOUS ALLY MUSSOLINI

     It was on March 12, 1939, that Eugenio reached the summit of
ambition and was crowned in St. Peter's. Next day a man who lived
on the frontier of Italy and France sent to the most respected
newspaper in Great Britain, the Manchester Guardian, a letter which
it -- and probably it alone of the British or American press -- had
the courage to publish. The writer reminded people that March 12th
was also the last day for Jews to remain in Italy. He described
from personal observation the appalling sufferings of the 70,000
Jews who, robbed of their goods, were racing for frontiers which to
a large extent were sealed against them. He saw old men, women, and
children panting up the Alpine slopes to France and says that the
carabineri and frontier-troops had "orders to facilitate their
migration if necessary with the help of a bayonet." He saw elderly
folks "collapse on the way up the vast acres of the Italian slope";
little children "stagger, their feet bleeding, into the frontier
villages"; women try to throw themselves under the traffic when the
French at last put up the barriers; babies abandoned or lost by the
wayside.

     This had gone on for a week and it was continuing in a last
frantic rush of the robbed Jews while the bells of St. Peter's and
all the churches in Italy rang out joyously over the sunny land.
What did the Pope of Peace do? The writer of the letter says that
the Italian carabinieri and soldiers were so moved that they forgot
their instructions about the bayonet and carried children tenderly
to the frontier. What did the Pope do? Nothing: except receive the
splendid congratulations of Mussolini and his ministers. Catholic
biographers boast that during the week which followed his
coronation Pacelli-Pius, sinking under the burden of work, slept
only three hours every night. Very heroic, but a little puzzling,
because as Secretary of State he had been doing just that work for 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               11

                          THE RED POPE

ten years. Why the arrears? But what did he do for the Jews, for
crushed and bleeding democrats of Italy, for the heart-broken and
suffering Czechs? Nothing, just nothing.

     The Italian problem had, as I said, been the first to engage
Pacelli when he became Secretary of State. I have told elsewhere
(Little Blue Book No. 1501 and ABC Library No. 2) the story of the
rise of Fascism and its early relation to the Church, In 1917
Mussolini and his cut-throats were, as the Kaiser had said, "scum."
They were atheists, republicans, and gangsters until 1921. Then, to
the surprise of many, Mussolini asked Cardinal Ratti for permission
for the Black Shirts to make a solemn procession to the tomb of the
Unknown Warrior in Milan Cathedral and the cardinal gladly accepted
and gave them a place of honor," says the Catholic Teeling (p.
106). Next year was the march on Rome (with Mussolini 100 miles
away), and the Duce pompously declared St. Peter's and all church
property under his special protection and ordered a thanksgiving
service with the King in attendance, At one of the principle
churches of Rome for the salvation of Italy. From Scum to Savior of
his Country in two years!

     There is no secret about it. It is one of the most painful
features of the American literature of the subject that the
respected head of a great university, Nicholas Murray Butler, dupe
of American Catholics, lent his pen (Looking Forward) in that
glorification of Mussolini which was as useful as a smoke-screen to
the Fascists while they prepared for war, Professor Salvemini
(Under the Axe of Fascism, 1936) has given Dr. Butler a
chastisement such as few scholars ever give each other for his
gullibility in accepting Catholic lies about the "confusion and
ruin" caused by the Communists from which Mussolini saved Italy.
The author Selde's shows that Mussolini later confessed that he
invented the Communist boogie to help the loan he had floated in
America. The danger was Socialism which was conquering Italy, and
so politicians, royalists, generals, and industrialists put
Mussolini in the saddle, after fumigating him of his atheism and
republicanism.

     But in spite of this powerful support of throne, army, and
capital the seat in the saddle remained very insecure for seven
years. Mussolini had not dared to extinguish the democracy for
which italians had fought so nobly from 1790 to 1870. Liberals and
Socialists were powerfully organized and, as in Spain, commanded
the majority of the votes in the cities, where the most intelligent
and the best-informed of the Italians lived. When, in 1924,
Mussolini was believed to have had the most respected leader of the
Socialists, Matteotti, removed by murder -- his public utterances
on the murder were so gross and callous that his guilt seemed clear
-- so many turned against him that at the elections of 1926 his
power was ominously shaken. He needed just one element to turn the
scale in his favor.

     The peasants and a certain number of the urban workers were
organized in a powerful Catholic Democratic movement. The Pope had,
as in Germany and Austria, allowed this bastard Socialism to grow
up under their eyes as one way to cheek the loss of so many
millions to the Socialists and Communists. These Catholic democrats


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               12

                          THE RED POPE

fought the Fascists as truculently as the Communists did and while
they equally detested the Socialists and Liberals and would not
cooperate with them, they at least represented further millions in
opposition to Mussolini.

     As Pacelli was in Germany during these years we do not suppose
that he had much to do with Vatican policy in Italy and will
dismiss events with a brief notice. Both sides, Blackshirts and
Black International, saw that they must sooner or later enter into
alliance against Socialism, and Mussolini's backers, the throne,
army, and capital, insisted on it. Mussolini on his side sacrificed
his convictions and restrained his anti-Papal followers with all
the ease of an adventurer. He, as I said, ordered a superb
thanksgiving service in church for his accession to power and
presented a very valuable, old library to the Vatican. He then
complained to the Vatican about ending the conduct of the Catholic
democrats under the priest Sturzo. The priest disappeared because
of obscure Fascist threats of reprisals against the Church. Seldes
says (The Vatican, p. 331) and the party was weakened. But the
opposition went on and Mussolini made little progress. The Vatican
knew the strength of its hand and wanted a price that Mussolini
feared his followers would never agree to pay.

     Seldes says that the revelation of the Pope's prestige in
America the Chicago Eucharistic Congress in 1926 at length stirred
Mussolini to bold action. It was more probably the menace of
Italian elections. Secret negotiations began at that time but the
Pope's terms were so exorbitant that they dragged out for two
years. In 1926 Farinacei, Mussolini's bulldog and leader of the
anti-clerical Old Guard of the Fascists, publicly declared that the
alliance was necessary. Mussolini, he said -- Seldes gives his
words -- was ready to deal with the Pope "in return for the moral
support of the Vatican for his policy." What the policy was" every
child knew -- the final extinction of liberty in Italy and, as a
minimum, the recovery of Savoy and Corsica from France, Malta from
England, Dalmatia from Yugo-Slavia -- and, instead of talking about
peaceful recovery by negotiation Mussolini was thundering about his
millions of bayonets whenever he opened his elegant mouth.

     In 1928 the Maltese got up a kind of revolt against Britain.
There was a trial of strength between the civil and the clerical
authorities, and the Premier, Lord Strickland, though a Catholic,
bitterly resented the interference of the clergy in the elections.
It was proved that they even used the confessional to intimidate
voters. Mussolini watched with great interest, and, when the
British Government in the end began its historic policy of
appeasement and Strickland was sacrificed, the Duce had a new proof
of the utility of the Church. A high Anglican official in Malta at
the time informed me, privately, that the Governor of the island,
who let, down Strickland, was "grossly deceived by the Papal
Delegate, Msgr. Pascal Robinson"; and he added "more mischief-
making in Dublin." The Black International won first blood for
Mussolini.

     So Fascists had to swallow the condition's, and in 1929 the
Blackshirts and the Blackmailer signed their compact. The Pope got
nearly $100,000,000, the independence and sovereignty of the 
Vatican City, the control of all Italian education except in the 

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               13

                          THE RED POPE

universities, and the enforcement of the Canon Law, the
establishment of the Church and endowment of the priests. The Duce
got a hand for the complete destruction of democracy in Italy and
the silence of the Pope while he murdered democrats and get out on
his glorious campaign to make Empire by selecting weak countries
for aggression.

     This was the year of Pacelli's return to Rome, but his
biographers are not lavish with detail at this point and do not
enable us to say definitely -- and I refuse to go on suspicions --
what, if any, share he had in this sordid business. I have to
recall it, as briefly as possible, because it was the first great
triumph of the Black International in our time, and it was one of
the most important steps in the advance of the brigands toward the
realization of their, plot. It finally established the power of
Mussolini. It caused Catholic papers and writers (and sympathizers
like Dr. Nicholas Murray Butler) to take the lead in that praise of
Fascism in italy -- had not the Pope blessed it? -- which was of
the greatest importance to the brigands in preparing their
armaments. And it gave Mussolini's imitator in Germany the idea
that after all it would pay to come to terms, hypocritically, with
the Black International.

     But, whatever share Pacelli may have had in drafting the
treaty of alliance with Mussolini, he had a full share in securing
that the alliance was not wrecked. The Fascist Party was still so
bitterly anti-Papal that Mussolini had, in soothing his followers,
to use language which the Pope angrily described (in the
Osservatore, May 30) as "heretical, and worse than heretical."
Blackshirts in Rome and the country insulted the priests and the
Church. The Pope spoke publicly of the possibility that he would
repudiate the Treaty, and in that case, he said, "Vatican City
itself would fall together with the state that is dependent on
Vatican City for its being" (same letter in the Osservatore). The
Catholic world and the world-press were alarmed. If Mussolini fell,
they said, Socialism would capture Italy. As Cardinal Hinsley, head
of the Church in Britain, said at a later date, Fascism was "in
many respects unjust" but it "Prevented worse injustice -- if it
goes under, God's cause goes with it." (Catholic Times, October
18th, 1935). God's cause is, in the mouth of a cardinal, the power
of the Church: and the end justifies the means.

     Pacelli to the rescue. Old Gasparri, who was stirring the Pope
to resist, was pushed aside, and the Saint George -- who wanted to
save the world -- the world of wealth and privilege -- from the
Dragon, Socialism donned his shining armor. Friction continued, of
course. Most of the leading Blackshirts hated the Pope, and the
Pope and his new Secretary of State heartily hated them. But the
alliance was indispensable. Mussolini now roared like any sucking
dove about the beauty of religion. "I wish to see religion
everywhere in the country," he said; "let us teach the children
their catechism" (Manchester Guardian, June 19, 1931). He, as I
said, publicly prayed in St. Peter's. Cardinal Gasparri at the
Eucharistic Congress of 1932 hailed him as "the man who first saw
clearly in the present world chaos" the man who is "getting the 




                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               14

                          THE RED POPE

State to work in accordance with the moral law of God" (Catholic
Herald, September 16 1932). The, friction was reduced and the world
was officially assured that the last Census had proved that 99
percent of the, Italians were Catholics.

     It was an insincere alliance. The organization of lay dupes
known as Catholic Action now gave Mussolini trouble. He demanded
that the Pope check it, and something seems to have been done, but
secretly Pacelli got the pope to write glowing praise of the
international Catholic Action and knowing that in spite of the
sacred independence of the Vatican City Mussolini's spies watched
it closely he sent the document by two priests to Paris for
publication. The old trickery of Vatican diplomacy was cultivated.
When, as in the case of the annexation of Austria, local prelates,
who would not dare to stir a finger against Papal policy, acted in
support of the Axis, the Vatican Radio would announce to the world
that the Pope disapproved. When this angered Axis supporters they
were assured that the radio message was unauthorized and sent out
without consulting the Vatican. Sometimes the Papal newspaper, the
Osservatore, was used and, to please both sides, was then declared
unauthorized. Neither the Radio nor the Osservatore would dare to
send out or print an unauthorized message on an important point.
Foreign correspondents in Rome received telephone messages from the
Vatican which were later declared unauthorized. Ambiguous
utterances, as in the case of Abyssinia, were put into the mouth of
the Pope, and Axis Catholics were encouraged to read them one way
and democratic Catholics to read them in the opposite way. And
every Easter and Christmas the beautiful message of Peace rolled
out, while between those festivals the Catholic world was inspired
everywhere to demand war on Spain, Russia, China, and Mexico.

     There was another aspect of the alliance. While Cardinal
Gasparri assured the Catholic world that Mussolini was "getting the
state to work in accordance with the moral law of God" and Cardinal
Hinsley was warning it that "God's cause" would be lost in Italy if
Mussolini fell, it was open to anybody to ascertain what social
improvement, if any, the Duce had actually accomplished. Reference
books like the Statesman's Year Book which were in every good
library gave year by year the official Italian returns of crime,
education, production, trade, debt, etc.

     It is astonishing today to reflect how very few people thought
of testing in this simple and positive way what truth there was in
almost universal press admiration of the efficiency and national
service of Fascism. It must, at least, seem astonishing to any man
who does not accept my suggestion that Mussolini's work in crushing
a great Socialist movement was so appreciated in the world-press
that it would not inquire whether his boast of efficiency was true
or not. It reproduced everything that its correspondents in Italy,
generally, Catholics, cared to send it about finer rail-services
(on some lines), new buildings, great farms on reclaimed land, and
so on, and it refused to see in works of reference, which were at
every editor's elbow that production was decaying and the internal
debt (chiefly due to forced loans) was increasing at so formidable
a rate that bankruptcy loomed ahead -- unless Mussolini brought
off, and brought off successfully, the aggressive war he promised
his people, and founded an Italian Empire by murdering and looting 
other peoples.

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               15

                          THE RED POPE

     On the religious side it was worse. The only definite test
weather a nation is or is not getting more in accord with "the
moral law of God" is to examine its criminal statistics. In the
Papal States, before the Kingdom of Italy had been established,
there had been no statistics of any sort, but not a single
authority questions the statement of contemporary Italian statesmen
and foreign visitors that crime and corruption were appalling.
Italy then, from 1870 onward, had a very fair success in reducing
crime, though the success was not nearly so great as in less-
Catholic countries. But from the time of the accession to power of
Mussolini crime increased amazingly. Convictions rose from about
500,000 a year in the period which Dr. Nicholas Murrak Butler
describes so darkly, the Socialist-Communist-Liberal period (before
1923), to 800,000 a year in the period of Mussolini's remarkable
efficiency.

     It makes it rather worse that this was due to some extent to
the poverty and distress he had brought upon both the workers and
the middle class while the Church, as I said, got an enormous
accession of wealth. Other causes were the impoverishment and
prostitution of education and the preparation of the people for the
wanton bloodshed of aggressive war. It was at the very time when
Pacelli, the future Pope of Peace, was bringing the Pope and the
Duce to have a cordial meeting in the Vatican that Mussolini was
writing the most official statement of the nature of Fascism for
the new Encyclopedia Italiana (article, "Fascism")

          When Fascism looks to the future, the general development
     of humanity, apart from considerations of present polities, it
     rejects the idea that perpetual peace is either possible or
     desirable. It repudiates Pacifism, which means a renunciation
     of struggle, a refusal to make sacrifices, War alone raises
     the energy of man to the highest pitch and impresses a seal of
     nobility upon the nations which have the manliness to
     undertake it. All other trials of strength are substitutes
     which never prove a man's worth by confronting him with the
     alternative of life and death.

     That was taught to every child in every school in Italy.
Didn't the Vatican know it? Are we supposed to find documentary
proof that the Vatican knew what was going on in every part of
Italy?

     Pacelli had come from Germany where he had seen Socialism as
a mighty power already in control of more than one-third of the
country, dreaded by the Catholic hierarchy because, though the
Social Democrats now worked with the Catholics, they drew millions
from the Church, dreaded by imperialists, militarists,
industrialists, and landowners. He came to Italy where he saw how
just such a powerful Socialist organization had been completely
destroyed as it was from 1928 onward by just such a coalition of
royalists, industrialists, militarists, and landowners taking up a
brutal spearhead resembling the German Nazism and consolidating its
position by an alliance with the Church just as in the good old
days of the early nineteenth, century. His grand idea, war on
Socialism, gradually took shape. How in its interest he kept the
Pope silent and the Italian Church wildly patriotic when Mussolini 
began his imperial brigandage in Abyssinia we shall see later.
Other problems meantime confronted him and the Black International.
                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               16

                          THE RED POPE

                           Chapter IV

                HIS DEAR YELLOW BROTHER IN BUDDHA

     the year 1899 the democratic Pope Leo XIII had made the ears
of American Catholic's burn. Their apologists and prelates had
begun to put before the public that conception of the Church of
Rome as the devoted ally of democracy and freedom with which we
have grown very familiar in recent years. Leo smote them hip and
thigh. That was "Americanism" not sound Catholicism. The arch-
bishops writhed but were silent. Leo was not very far from death,
and "from that time to this no Pope has spoken out." So says the
Catholic Teeling, and he adds: "The reason would seem to have been
that America has provided an ever-increasing supply of funds and an
ever increasing supply of missionaries." (The Pope in Polities, p.
150). Certainly a golden reason; though why, on Catholic
principles, a particular version of Catholicism not backed by gold
Should be so humiliatingly denounced and then tolerated when it was
gold is not clear. If I assigned that reason for the Vatican's
change of policy in regard to American Catholic propaganda I would
be angrily accused of wicked suspicions and suggestions where I
could not give positive evidence.

     But the Vatican only changed its tactics not its policy. Pius
XI, says Teeling, was particularly zealous to bring the oriental
Churches into his fold -- "so that the growth of democratic
Catholicism in the New World be counter-balanced." At the Vatican,
he says (p. 3), "Western influence is not considered very good for
the Church." That we shall see, is one reason why, Mussolini was
encouraged in the rape of Abyssinia and his design of becoming
Emperor of the East, why the Vatican flirted for years with Russia,
and why it approved the savage aggression against Yugo-Slavia and
Greece. To sustain this policy the Secretary of State had to do
some very neat tight-rope balancing. For British opinion, in spite
of all the "Lords" and aristocrats the Jesuits have captured, he
seems not to have cared much. If for once I cared to indulge in a
conjecture I should say that he detests England. Whether that is
connected with his chilly experiences when he was sent to represent
the Papacy at the coronation of George V or whether he sees through
the Catholic pretense that they are "converting England" I don't
know, but Teeling, who made a number of visits to Rome, says that
after Pacelli became secretary of State English Catholics found a
reception at the Vatican and could with difficulty get an audience
with the Pope. They were told to see Pacelli, and they discovered
that they were "not popular," though doubtless they left the
customary purse with Pacelli.

     But American Catholicism was a very different matter. It
claimed 20,000,000 members and said that it would have the majority
in America by the end of the century. Its wealth is already in the
billions of dollars; its annual income $800,000,000. Imagine
Pacelli's eyes rolling as he turned these sum's into Italian lire!
In 1936 he visited America, Did he encourage the efforts as
described by Seldes, of American Catholics, in cooperation with
Mexican refugee priests, to get an alliance with Wall Street in
order to secure the liquidation of Bolshevism in Mexico? Had he any
meetings with the Italian and German plotters in America? Did he 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               17

                          THE RED POPE

harden that feeling against Russia which Germany counted as one of
its favorable conditions? But we must not be suspicious. There is
no Proof. We know one thing that he did do. Instead of rebuking the
American propagandists who represented the Church as spontaneously
democratic and a lover of freedom and peace he went out of his way
everywhere to leave the impression that he cordially admired the
American spirit of freedom and democracy. He certainly did not
mention that the Vatican policy was to augment the oriental
elements in the Church so as to counter-balance "western influence"
which was "not considered very good for the Church, in the mild
language of a Catholic writer. And he certainly did not call the
attention of Americans to the fact that the Vatican had entered
into a close alliance with Japan.

     This alliance with Japan ran the usual course in Catholic
literature. At first it was indignantly denied. Where was the
proof? When the Osservatore itself proudly announced on May 5,
1935, that the Pope was to send an ambassador to Tokyo and that
Tokyo was to appoint a representative at the Pope's court in
Vatican City a new note was struck. It was the Pope's duty to enter
into negotiation with any government to protect the spiritual
interests of Catholics under that government. Had not even England
sent a representative to the Pope's court? Yes: but "poor rich
powerful England" as Ambassador Dodd called it, was up to its eyes
in a policy of appeasement, while in 1936 Japan had started on its
full career of aggression and of the massacre, debauching, and
exploiting of hundreds of millions of weaker folk. That is some
difference. And when, in the spring of 1941, Pacelli-Plus had a
most cordial interview with that other Man of Peace Matsuoka, the
most brazen liar in a world of fluent liars, in the Vatican and,
just when Japan was plotting to take advantage of the heavy burden
of America and Britain to defy them by worse aggression and more
insolent outrages than ever, the Pope smilingly presented him with
a gold medal . . .

     The story of the Japanese share in the world-crime is now
fairly well known -- see ABC Library No. 6 -- and cannot be
repeated here. All the world has seen its steady aggression for ten
years, and all the world ought to have known from the start that
Japan meant to conquer the whole eastern half of Asia and all
islands in the Pacific. That the truth of this depends upon the
disputed authenticity of some memoir by Baron Tanaka in the year
1927 is nonsense. I have described, largely from American
journalists and authors (like Upton Close's Challenge. 1933), the
very open growth of the plot since the later years of the last
century. America was in fact so well aware of it that it alone of
the democracies began years ago to take defensive naval measures,
but there was, under the usual trade-interests, a lamentable lack
of warning in the Press an almost general failure to see that
Japan's were part of a world-plot and in this case a very
mischievous appeasement-policy in religious periodicals on account
of Japan's threats to the Christian missions.

     To state events very briefly up to the time when the Japanese
criminals, the American and European encouragement of modernization
in Japan (while it paid better not to encourage it in China), the
disbanding of the old Samurai swashbucklers (which sent vicious 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               18

                          THE RED POPE

elements into the army, politics, and journalism), and the
successful wars of Japan on easy victims like China (1895) and
Tsarist Russia (1904) gave the yellow men inflated ideas of their
ability and importance. The Black Dragon Society, which wanted the
conquest of north-eastern Asia, was founded in 1901 and inspired
aggressive fanaticism in naval and military circles. Advantage was
taken of the European War of 1914-18 to get a strangle-hold on
China but a terrible earthquake and the quick recovery of the
Allies checked the ambition, though propaganda continued. By 1931
there were patriotic societies enthusiastically preaching it and
running to two or three million members. General Hayashi, who had
led the invasion of Manchuria in defiance of the civil government,
said in a speech to foreign correspondents; at the close of the
campaign:

          Japan's desire for expansion on the Eastern Asiatic
     Continent manifested in her Manchurian police has been her
     unalterable policy since her foundation.

     The development of the gangrene differed little from the
development in Europe. In Japan the army and navy were the nucleus
and source of infection. The score of rich families which mainly
represented capitalism were easily persuaded to see that it was the
destiny of the Yamato race to extend its culture to (or exploit)
China. The Emperor hardly needed persuading that soldiers know
best. The politicians and the heads of the Buddhist and Shinto
religions were bought. For the quite open share of these religions
and their sudden enrichment by the imperialist brigands see the
speeches at the Chicago International Conference on Religion in
1934 (edited by A.E. Haydon, Moderit World-Trends in Religion).

     The occupation of Manchuria in 1931 was the first step in the
realization of what would prove to be a plot of Germany and Japan
to control and exploit the world: a crime which in future history
dwarf every other crime that was ever committed or attempted. The
world now pays a ghastly price for the obscene squabbling of trade-
interests which prevented the destruction of the plot at this early
stage by an economic ostracism of Japan, but few people still seem
to understand that the Black International at once moved to the
support of the aggressor.

     This is no matter of "suspicion." It was done quietly and in
such a form that it could, if the world's attention was drawn to
it, be represented as an inevitable exercise of the Vatican's
religious functions. It was first disclosed, as far as I can trace,
in an article by a French priest in the Catholic Review des Deux
Mondes in 1935 (January 15). The negotiations which were then going
on at the Vatican for mutual ambassadors with Japan made it clear
that some years of cordial cooperation had preceded; and in any
case the French had played as sordid a part in the matter as the
Black International and they were disposed to boast about it.

     The facts are now so well known that Catholic writers like
Teeling discuss them freely. It appears that the Vatican had
approached Japan, seeking favored-nation treatment, in 1922, but
the Buddhist authorities, already brought (or bought) to the
convention that the Yellow Race would sweep all White influence out


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               19

                          THE RED POPE

of eastern Asia, successfully resisted the application. Buddhist
monks might take that view but Japanese statesmen knew that the
White Race was not to be turned down too openly until the plot was
far advanced. It was to be duped by smooth assurances that it would
have its share in a regenerated China and its enormously increased
capacity for consumption. It was particularly necessary to do this
after the first rape of China, so the Vatican got its opportunity.

     The French clerical writer says:

          "A short time after it had given birth to the new state
     of Manchukuo the Japanese government advised its ward to turn
     to the Holy See with a request that it should be officially
     recognized; an event of some importance seeing that the Powers
     refused to recognize it and Japan had left the League of
     Nations. These Japanese-Manchukuoan overtures did not secure
     formal recognition but, as the Catholic missions in Manchukuo
     supported them the Vatican appointed a French Vicar Apostolic
     to negotiate with the government of Manchuktio about religious
     affairs." (p. 297).

     He further explains that it was the French missionaries in
Japan who persuaded the Japanese government to approach the
Vatican. France was at the time, for reasons which will be given
later, working very amiably with the Vatican, and French
missionaries would not be ignorant of the golden rule that trade
and the evangelization of the heathen go together. The Vatican was
to get a monopoly of missionary work in Japan and China, which it
fully expected to be taken over by Japan (Teeling), and France
would be rewarded with trade.

     It was a nice problem for Pacelli, the new Secretary of State,
and he solved it in his characteristic manner. Formally to
recognize the annexation of Manchuria just when merely secular
governments all over the world were condemning it as an outrage and
a danger to the peace was out of the question. Even the American
apologist would hardly be able to explain away that. So the Papal
organ announced quietly, as a matter of routine, that a Vicar
Apostolic had been set up in Manchukuo at the request of its
government. That was for the Japs a sufficiently clear recognition
of that government by the Vatican as a sovereign power. Does any
man suppose that the Japanese statesmen and military leaders nearly
all of whom are skeptics, cared the toss of a coin about the
spiritual interests or the immortal souls of the Manchurian
peasants? Or that the Vatican supposed they did? The brutalized
condition to which the Japs soon reduced the natives is answer
enough.

     The Chinese in Shanghai sent me copies of bitter complaints of
the Protestant missionaries in China about the way in which the
Japs were persecuting them in favor of Catholic missionaries, but
a more important feature of the matter is that from that time the
Pope damped down in the whole Catholic world all criticism of his
dear Yellow Brother in Buddha. By 1934, the clerical writer in
Revue des Deux Mondes said, the cordial relations of the two had
gone so far that "no Japanese prince or mission now passes through
Rome without paying its homage to the Sovereign Pontiff." And to 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               20

                          THE RED POPE

Mussolini, of course, who was now in prayerful communication with
the Vatican. Again, does anyone suppose that Japanese diplomats and
princes called upon the Pope to thank him for caring for the
immortal souls, in which they did not believe, of Manchurian
peasants?

     But the alliance was brought into full light in 1935 when the
Obsservatore announced the proposal of an exchange of ambassadors.
There seems to have been some hard bargaining, but in 1936 a Roman
Catholic prelate appeared, incongruously enough, at the Mikado's
court and a yellow man in the Vatican City. By this time the
Japanese pretense of merely wishing to civilize Manchuria was a
mockery. It had now advanced far into China, having taken Jehol in
1933 and broken through the Great Wall in 1935. The mask was
cynically thrown aside just when the diplomatic relations with the
Vatican were put on the most respectable footing. By the customary
Axis method of brazen lying excuses for further aggression upon the
weak Chinese were invented, the "incident" was conducted with
appalling outrages, and a trail of misery and demoralization spread
in the wake of the Japanese armies. Japan was now as deadly a
menace to civilization as Germany and Italy, and the bland lies
with which it met every inquiry were nauseating.

     During these years very little was said in the world-press
about this beautiful friendship of the supreme head of the Church
of Rome and the supreme head of the degenerate Shinto and Buddhist
religions. Catholics had won their claim and censorship of the
press on the edifying principle that it was not right to print
anything that was "offensive to Catholics"; and to obtrude this
cordial alliance of the Vatican with the Japanese government, which
had by this time incurred the loathing of every decent man and
would be decidedly offensive to Catholics. Yet the cordiality
continued through all the years of mendacity, hypocrisy, outrage,
and increasing menace to the world.

     On December 26 Matsuoka, who was particularly used for some
years to dupe Americans because he was a Christian, said in the
Japanese Diet, dropping the mask of lust now that Japan could take
advantage of the war in Europe, that there would be peace only if
America agreed that Japan should "dominate the mainland and occupy
a preferential position in Indo-China and the Dutch Indies," and to
"dominate the Western Pacific"; not for its own profit, of course,
but for "the good of humanity." In March, 1941, this slimiest of
the yellow reptile-group went to Moscow and signed a cynical pact
with Russia. We will not call that hypocrisy because Stalin was
certainly not duped, but that was not for lack of intention on
Matsuoka's part. He went on to Berlin and Rome to discuss with the
other gangsters the real plan for the summer, the sudden attack on
Russia and the question of Japanese intervention, and he had also
a long cordial talk with the Pope, who presented him with a gold
medal. All this can be verified in Keesing's admirable day-to-day
survey of the world-press. Are we asked to believe that with the
Pope Matsuoka discussed only the spiritual interests of the Chinese
who were under the loving care of the Japanese army of occupation?





                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               21

                          THE RED POPE

     What exactly the situation is today it is impossible to
ascertain. Japan will, of course, soon or later double cross the 
Vatican, as those super-crooks always do. Has it already done so?
The latest news is that the Japanese are organizing a National
Spiritual Mobilization Campaign in which three recognized
religions, Shinto, Buddhism, and Christianity are to cooperate. But
the Christian Church is to be purely Japanese. It must receive no
funds from abroad -- which opens up a nice prospect for the
American Protestant missions -- admit no foreign influence, and
make minute reports of all its services and activities; and the
worship of the Son of Heaven must be included in the cult
everywhere. Has Pacelli-Pius swallowed that pill?

     In the eighteenth century Rome made it, one of its chief
counts in its indictment of the Jesuits that, in order to win more
converts than other missionaries, they had mixed heathen rites with
Christian. Pacelli has done just that. An Anglican prelate who was
present at the large International Conference on religion in India
in 1938 wrote me that the representatives of the Protestant
Churches learned with a shock that "the Papacy, after much
wavering, has finally given permission to Japanese Papists to
indulge in Emperor worship." Presumably they do not tell their
Japanese converts how early Christians died rather than worship the
Roman Emperor.

     It should prove, when the details are known, a picturesque
development, but to most of us trifle in comparison with the
Vatican's moral apostasy and betrayal of civilization. For an
exhibition of greed, hypocrisy, and condonation of crime its
alliance with Japan would be hard to beat. During these ten years
when Pacelli was vilifying Russia, which was building up in peace
and with a sense of international honor what most people now call
great civilization, he was cultivating friendly relations with and
giving aid and encouragement to one of the real blackguard-nations.
It is futile to protest that we must look at the Situation from the
Papal angle. The most respectable light in which you can put it is
that a Churchman would be bound to consider that a prospect of
bringing into the Roman sphere of influence, which is so much more
morally effective than any other, all the missionary work in
eastern Asia, outweighs all other considerations. So much the worse
for the Churchman's creed or policy. It puts the increase of the
power of the Church above all decency of international intercourse,
above the appalling sufferings of hundreds of millions of Chinese
and their right to a national life of their own, above the ghastly
and very imminent chances of a world-war. it means that the Black
International tramples on those social, moral, and humanitarian
principles which are said by its apologists in America to be just
what the Church holds most sacred.

                            Chapter V

             HE ORGANIZES THE PLOT IN SOUTH AMERICA

     Pacelli-Pius was rightly selected for the Papacy as the ablest
cardinal in the Church of Rome. That does not imply genius. Half of
these cardinals would not successfully run a large grocery store.
Pacelli has considerable ability. He is also the most widely-


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               22

                          THE RED POPE

informed cardinal on the world-situation. His immediate
predecessors were of the type that asks: What are Keats? Even Leo
XIII was amazingly duped by his Vatican 'specialists' about the
state of affairs in England -- they persuaded him that if he
recognized the validity of Anglican "orders" the whole Church of
England would join up under the Papal banner -- in France, and
elsewhere. Pacelli has travelled more than any. Besides spending
twelve years in Germany he has made three visits to England,
travelled all over North and South America, and visited France,
Hungary, and other countries.

     Upon which boast of his biographers we may make two comments.
First that in very few of his acts can any apologist make the
excuse of ignorance or misinformation, the common Catholic excuse
for Papal misconduct. Matsuoka might deceive some people with his
bland assurances that his country sought "not the good of the good
of Japan but the good of humanity" and (in the spring of 1941) that
it had "not the slightest idea of taking advantage of the
misfortunes of France," but he no more deceived Pius XII than he
deceived Stalin. The Pope knew well that Japan was pledged to a
course, in its selfish interest, which would lead inexorably to war
math America and Great Britain. So it was in every other part of
his policy.

     The second comment is that, instead of flowers springing up
wherever Pacelli trod, as is told of holy men in earlier ages, the
path might generally be traced by blood and misery. The violence
had occurred in Italy before he returned to it, but he took care
that it was not relaxed. He compels the Church in Germany to help
to power the most dangerous psychopath in Europe. He goes to South
America, and his visit is followed by the triumph of Fascist
violence everywhere. He goes to the United States, and there is a
fresh demand for the extinction of Bolshevism in Mexico and Russia.
He goes to Paris in 1937 and France prepares to betray Czecho-
Slovakia and, when the time comes, to betray itself. He goes to
Hungary in 1938 and it is ready to see Austria and Czecho-Slovakia
enslaved and to march itself against Russia and help in every way
the destroyers of civilization.

     The visit to South America was in 1934, when the usual excuse
for Papal intrigue was given: he must preside at the Eucharistic
Congress at Buenos Aires. Twenty years, even thirty years ago, the
priests of Buenos Aires would not have dared to hold such a
function. When it was proposed to hold one in London Protestants
appealed to me to cooperate in getting Catholics forbidden to have
a procession of their Eucharist in one street. I said that I would
rather encourage them to do so -- and take care that the crowd
understood what it meant. The doctrine is so monstrous and
incredible that the journalists who every year write with profound
respect about the holding of the Eucharistic Congress cannot have
the least idea what it means.

     You see a priest carrying a star-shaped golden vessel in the
center of which, enclosed in glass, is the white disk of a wafer of
wheaten flour. To the Catholic it was a thin wafer until the priest
breathed his magic wards over it, but there is no longer any flour
there. The substance of the cake has been annihilated: only the 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               23

                          THE RED POPE

accidents (the color, shape, feel, etc.) remain. As I have hid to
swallow it -- the wafer, I mean, as well is the doctrine --
thousands of times I can assure that the "accidents" are very much
like those of a dry cracker. It sticks to the pilate, etc. And on
the strength of this prehistoric theory of substance and accidents,
begot by the genius Aquinas out of Aristotle, the Church today
sternly insists that the wafer has been annihilated, and the living
divine-human person of Jesus has taken its place -- quite literally
-- that if you broke it into a hundred crumbs the living and entire
body of Jesus would be present in each, and that this is true of
each one of the millions of wafers (Eucharists) which are stored in
little safes on the altars of all the Catholic Churches in the
world. Pfew!

     I say that in the earlier part of this century priests in
Buenos Aries or Rio or Lima would not have made a parade of that
belief in the streets The historic conflict of the Blacks and
Whites in Latin America had ended in an incomplete but considerable
victory for the Liberals. The middle-class was substantially
skeptical. In 1906 the Freethinkers of South America held a
Congress in Buenos Aires. The delegates crowded the Teatro
Argentino. Argentinians of high position (Vice-Admiral Howard, Soto
and Alvarez of the Council of War, etc.) supported them. The
Presidents of Guatemala and Uruguay sent telegrams of
congratulations in the name of their republics. The Women's
Committee, of 50 members, included some the most brilliant writers
in South America. The leading papers treated the Congress with
respect . . .

     And in 1934 the public men of Argentina were falling Over each
other to kiss Pacelli's ring. What had happened? The Reds, of
course. Socialism spread through South America with extraordinary
rapidity after the last war, and the news of the revolution in
Spain in 1932 gave a powerful impetus to the movement. So impartial
an observer as the famous woman traveller Rosita Forbes said in
1933 after a prolonged visit that "it is possible that the
organization and method's of Soviet Russia may be destined to
provide the machinery necessary to liberate the South American
Republics" (Eight Republics in search of a Future, p. 7.) In Peru,
she found that "the educated youth of Peru is in the hands of
Moscow." A minister who introduced an anti-Communist law in the
Chilean Congress was compelled to resign, and the government
refused to recognize degrees granted by Catholic universities. An
American merchant who had lived 25 years in Chile reported that
"Communism of the intellectual type" was very widespread. The
Alianza Popular Revolutionaria Americana (Apra) swept the
continent, and its leader would have become President of Peru but
for Black corruption of the vilest kind. The Rev. Dr. McKay, a
Protestant missionary in the Argentine, said that the Trade Unions
turned out any worker who supported the Church, that the workers
now commonly called a man they wanted to vituperate "you poor
Christ" (equivalent to the American "son of a lady-dog"), and that
one of their leaders said publicly that the sound of the word God
made him spew. I was editing the Militant Atheist in 1933 and gave
plenty of details of this sort.

 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               24

                          THE RED POPE

     Pacelli to the rescue. Returning to the subject in the 'Appeal
to Reason' Library (No. 3) in 1935 I gave the symptoms of spreading
reaction and asked: "Will the struggle end as in Italy, Spain, and
Poland, in a coalition of all political parties with the Church
again Labor?" At the time Pacelli was still an obscure emissary of
the Vatican whose position as Secretary of State was according to
the Italian Press, not very secure. How bitterly we pay for not
watching the Black International more closely! In South America, as
in America and Britain and Italy and Germany, there were Socialist
leaders who said that the fight against the Church was over -- some
wanted friendly alliance with it -- and all attention must be
concentrated on the politico-economic struggle. And in the whole of
South America as in Italy, Germany, France, Austria, Spain, Czecho-
Slovakia, etc., within a year or two Socialism was bloodily trodden
underfoot and the Church was triumphant.

     The change did not begin in 1934. The Blacks were already
organizing and intriguing everywhere, and futile revolts
strengthened their hands. But after 1934 the clerical-capitalist
revolution proceeded at a great pace. I have not a shred of proof
to offer that, Pacelli counted in the organization of this. Just
naughty suspicion, and you may please yourself whether you accept
it. I do not say that Pacelli intrigued to bring closer together
the heads of the Church and the heads of the army and state who in
every part of South America were shuddering before the Red Menace.
The only facts we know are that the situation was completely
transformed after 1934; that within a few years six of the ten
Republics of South America including Brazil and Peru, were
truculently Fascist, and even Argentina (where the priests have no
millions of Indians to stir up) and Chile were semi-Fascist; that
most of the Liberals had in fact lined up with the Church; and that
this coalition was first revealed on a large scale when Pacelli,
the arch-intriguer and hater of Socialism in every form had gone
from capital to capital and soldiers and statesmen knelt for his
blessing. You may want to go father than I do and believe that
Pacelli not only promoted the entire cordial of Liberal statesmen
and their traditional enemies, but encouraged also the leaders of
the millions of Italians and Germans, who, as the duped statesmen
have now found, were already secretly weaving their great plot.
Please yourself.

     The upshot was that not only was "the menace of Bolshevism"
destroyed in South America but the Church got between ten and
twenty million apostates bullied into silence and their leaders
flung into jail. Figures are farcical in Latin America. In Mexico
a high official warned me privately that their published statement
that their population consisted of 4,000,000 Indians and 12,000,000
Mexicans might be turned the other way round. A careful recent
estimate is that there are 90,000,000 Indian's in South and Central
America. Few people seem to realize that these provide about one-
third of the total number of the Pope's real subjects. As in
Mexico, the majority of them would turn against the priests as soon
as they got encouragement to do so from their government. The
situation was closely parallel to that of Russia. Within another
ten years the great bulk of the 90,000,000 would be lost to the
Vatican. Are we asked to think that Pacelli scrupulously avoided 



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               25

                          THE RED POPE

political maneuvers that promised to avert that tragedy? Remember
the Irish revolutionaries confiding their plot to the Pope;
remember Dollfus's, Franco, Henlein, and others.

     But we are concerned with actualities. The cream of the
Indians, of the millions of workers of such mixed blood that it is
time we dropped these racial distinctions, are the industrial
workers. The majority, we saw, had abandoned Rome, Add the
university youths and a large number of their professors and other
middle-class men and Liberals of the old school, and it will be
seen that Rome had to envisage an actual secession of between ten
and twenty millions. They are now back in the fold -- on paper.
They are bullied into silence and their most active representatives
are in jail. By the end of 1935 there were 10,000 political
prisoners in jail in Brazil alone. Yes, says the Catholic, the scum
who had recently organized a rebellion. So it was reported in
America. But the very impartial British 'Annual Register' (1935)
which gives the above figure adds: "Among these were university
professors and many other distinguished Brazilians belonging to the
best society" (p. 312). They were victims of the Black
International.

     And by one of those blunders into which the brutally and
callousness of the agents of these Fascist governments are always
betraying them we learned that this Church-Wealth coalition is not
only using force but, as it has always done, using it savagely. The
Brazilian police arrested as spies two ladies of the British
aristocracy, Lady Hastings and Lady Cameron, who were visiting Rio.
Viscount Hastings wrote a letter to the London press (News-
Chronicle, July 14, 1936) on what they saw. It contained such
things as:

          In the prison they saw men and women who had been so
     badly beaten that they could only move with the greatest
     difficulty; a man's wife had been beaten insensible in front
     of him to make him confess; the hands of another man had been
     mutilated by having iron spikes driven underneath the nails
     ... The day before my wife and sister were arrested, the
     American boy Victor Baron was found dead in prison after
     'questioning' . . .

     Immutable Rome! So it was in France in the thirteenth century,
all over south Europe in the nineteenth, in Spain forty years ago,
and is now in many countries. If a mere working man, or even a
professor, had reported these things, moat people would say "Red
lies." There is obviously some use in Aristocrats.

     In Mexico the struggle with the Church and the attempt of
Catholics in America to get intervention, which would certainly
mean war and annexation, had begun long before Pacelli became
Secretary of State. I am tracing the action of the Black
International not of Pacelli alone but I have written this earlier
history so fully elsewhere that I will not return to it. I need
repeat only about the acute conflict of 1926 that I was then in
Mexico and saw with what remarkable indifference the people
accepted what was mendaciously called the persecution of the
Church, and read articles by Mexican Catholic journalists in the 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               26

                          THE RED POPE

leading Havana paper a little later expressing deep disgust with
the lies (executions of priests etc.) sent by the priests to the
Knights of Columbus, who zealously enlarged them and circulated
them in Wall Street. If you want a Catholic (or at all events pro-
Catholic) witness to this close alliance for years of American
Catholics. and Wall Street read George Seldes' 'The Vatican' (1934,
pp. 278-86). There was, of course, an outcry and the American
Catholic bishops published a letter denying that they were working
for armed intervention." They merely felt it their duty to "sound
a warning to Christian civilization that its foundations are being
attacked and undermined." God, they said would find a way to,
destroy the evil. By priests blowing trumpets, I suppose. A thinner
pretense of pacifism it would be hard to find. It has a Japanese
ring.

     Pacelli did not go to Mexico, but the brilliant Church-Fascist
success that followed his visit to South America had echoes in the
north. In 1935 F.V. Williams, Al Smith's publicity agent, had a
revolting article in 'Liberty' (Aug. 24) calling for intervention.
A Mexican Catholic annihilated his statements in the 'Forum;' in
fact, they had been answered in advance by various visitors to
Mexico (World-Telegram, June 8, 1935, etc.) The Catholic Teeling
also admits that Catholics intrigued at Washington to get
intervention and that Msgr. Burke served as intermediary.

     It is, at all events, true that from 1936 Pacelli included
Mexico in the list of countries in which he invited the great
powers to "extinguish" Bolshevism. It was so clearly a war-program
that I have never read even a Catholic attempt to give his words,
the slogan he sent through the whole Catholic world, any other
meaning. An innocent young nun or a Lord Halifax might suggest that
he "extinguish it by prayer." Is that what he meant when he sent
Cardinal Faulhaber, as we shall see, to beg Hitler to allow the
Church to cooperate with him in the good work? It was a war
program; a call to, as it has proved, the bloodiest war in history.
So who are the real Reds?



                          ****     ****


    Reproducible Electronic Publishing can defeat censorship.



   The Bank of Wisdom is a collection of the most thoughtful,
scholarly and factual books. These computer books are reprints of
suppressed books and will cover American and world history; the
Biographies and writings of famous persons, and especially of our
nations Founding Fathers. They will include philosophy and
religion. all these subjects, and more, will be made available to
the public in electronic form, easily copied and distributed, so
that America can again become what its Founders intended --

                 The Free Market-Place of Ideas.

                          ****     ****

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               27


                        27 page printout
    Reproducible Electronic Publishing can defeat censorship.

          This file, its printout, or copies of either
          are to be copied and given away, but NOT sold.

          Bank of Wisdom, Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                          ****     ****

Edited by E. Haldeman-Julius

THE BLACK INTERNATIONAL          No. 3

               HOW THE CROSS COURTED THE SWASTIKA
                         FOR EIGHT YEARS

                        by Joseph McCabe

                   HALDEMAN-JULIUS PUBLICATION
                     GIRARD  -- : --  KANSAS
                          ****     ****

                            Chapter I

                 SOCIALISM EMPTIES THE CHURCHES

     The aim of the Black International is to protect and augment
the power and wealth of the Church. Since however, the clergy do
not share their power, much less their wealth, with the laity, we
may define this aim more sharply. It is to protect and augment
their own wealth and power, especially that of the higher clergy
and the Pope and his Court. History compels us to add that in
pursuing this aim the Black International is not restrained by any
considerations or sentiments which are not strictly ecclesiastical.

     That statement, a Catholic may object, may be formally correct
but it is malicious. The Church, he holds -- because in this
respect the priests have taken him into their confidence wants
wealth and power only in order that it may more effectively promote
the spiritual interests and eternal welfare of men. So we
understood; and we understood also that that is why the priest
must, whenever it is necessary, ignore all ordinary human emotions
and interests. What are the things of time compared with those of
eternity? It is a nice formula. The sufferings of 100,000,000
Chinese under the red hooves of the Japanese are doubtless sad to
contemplate but the spiritual welfare of all Asia requires that the
Pope shall not say so to his friend the Mikado. The first of
Pacelli-Pius's famous Five Peace Principles, which won the
admiration of the world, is "the right to life and freedom of all
nations, big and small, powerful and weak. But the spiritual
welfare of the Abyssinians (and the Spaniards, Albanians, Greeks,
Serbs, etc.) is much more important than life or freedom so he had
no harsh words for his friend Mussolini.

     We might, indeed, if we had leisure to go into these matters,
inquire whether the enormous accession of wealth and power to the
Church after the conversion of Constantine in the fourth century
and again during the Renaissance was really followed by a great
spiritual uplift or by a remarkable corruption of both people and
Church. But we have not time for these digressions. Here we have to
consider contemporary events.

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               1

               HOW THE CROSS COURTED THE SWASTIKA

     Now we saw in the first booklet of this series that the need
of the Black International to protect its wealth and power was
never greater than it is today. In my Decay of the Church of Rome
(1909) I proved to the satisfaction of everybody except Catholic's,
who have a short way of differing from me without reading me, that
in the course of the nineteenth century the Church lost, in actual
seceders and descendants of seceders, about 100,000,000 followers.
It lost almost if not quite as many during the next 35 years, or
between 1900 and 1935. The leakage steadily continued, even
increased in all countries except those, such as Ireland and Poland
in which the priests could keep then people in blinkers. The
progress of Socialism, against which the Church had declared war to
the death, made the leakage worse, and after the Russian Revolution
it became a flood. In Spain, Italy, Austria, and Latin America we
have the decisive evidence of electoral statistics, which show a
world-loss of at least 60,000,000 since the last war. Even for a
small country like Czecho-Slovakia Catholics, we shall see, admit
a loss of about 2,000,000 in fifteen years, and the drift continued
in America and Britain. Nor was it only a question of the
humiliation of losing so many members. The Church in Germany was
estimated to have a wealth of $20,000,000,000, and it was melting
away.

     These spectacular losses are the key to the policy which
Pacelli followed, first as Secretary of State and then as Pope Pius
XII. When you know of these indisputable losses, which are not
obtruded upon public notice, you see that the line followed by the
Black International was quite inevitable in view of its primary
aim. It is the folk who do not know of the losses who are puzzled
by the plain evidence of the Italian Church's enthusiastic support
of Mussolini in all his crimes, the Vatican's open alliance with
Japan, or the Pope's strident call upon various governments to
cooperate with him in the extinction, by war, of Bolshevism in
Spain, Russia, China, and Mexico. Therefore in dealing with each
country in which we trace the action of the Black International I
give definite evidence from electoral statistics or Catholic
admissions of the enormous losses of the Church. In the last book
I showed this in the case of Italy and South America.

     It is vitally necessary in the case of Germany. References to
the Church in that country suggests to the reader at one moment
that it is tremendously wealthy and powerful -- a good third of the
nation -- and the next day represent it as cowering powerlessly
under the Nazi lash. The American public his been particularly
puzzled by Cardinal Mundelein making himself the chief spokesman of
the Church. Here was a great Churchman, praised in the highest
terms by the Pope and the warmest friend of Pacelli when he visited
America, scourging the Nazis at a time when no statesman in the
world ventured to warn his people of the coming evil.

     The human side of these consecrated movements is always
interesting. Mundelein sent larger sums to the Papal treasury than
any other cardinal in the Church and promised even vaster funds
when prosperity returned to Chicago. So the Vatican courageously
refused to condemn him when requested by Hitler to do so. Besides,
it was convenient to have a rather muddle-headed enthusiast
assuring America that these charges of vice against the holy monks 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               2

               HOW THE CROSS COURTED THE SWASTIKA

of Catholic Germany were wicked Nazi fabrications to cover a
persecution of the Church. It was not necessary to tell Mundelein
that, as we shall see presently, the Pope had already suppressed
the whole body of these Franciscan monks in Westphalia for
comprehensive corruption -- they were all in jail Anyway -- and
that the Catholic bishop of Berlin had told Hitler in a published
letter that the bishops of Germany admitted that there was a large
amount of "moral perversity" in the monastic world. How could
Mundelein know that the Vatican and the German hierarchy were still
pressing Hitler to be friends? He had sworn to exterminate
Bolshevism, after a kiss of betrayal, and there was nothing in the
whole world that the Vatican more fiercely desired than the
destruction of Bolshevism, by hook or by crook, in every country.

     When the Pope, who would presently so solemnly assert "the
right to life and freedom of all nations," was asked to condemn the
invasion of Norway, the beginning of Hitler's monstrous enslavement
of Europe, he objected that there were only 2,000 Catholics in
Norway and he had to think of the consequences for the "30,000,000
Catholics of Germany." What he meant was that, since the Church of
Rome does not admit that a man can quit it when his reason or his
conscience demands this, there were in Germany some 30,000,000 men
and women and their children who had received Catholic baptism. In
1905 the Church claimed to have 25,000,000 members. Taking into
account the beautiful fertility of Catholic parents these ought by
1940 to have grown to at least 35,000,000. In point of fact it is
easy to show that there were at the latter date not more than
15,000,000 German Catholics, probably not more than 10,000,000.
This implies a loss in the present generation of at least
15,000,000, probably 20,000,000; and this loss is not so much due
to the action of the Nazis as to the rapid growth of Socialism and
Communism since 1918. It implies also a proportionate loss of
wealth.

     The new world-conditions which led to the disintegration of
the medieval Church everywhere -- the advance of culture, universal
free education, cheap literature and free libraries, the growth of
urban and industrial populations, etc, -- had had at least as
devastating an effect in Germany as in Britain and America. Think
of the huge circulation of such writers as Nietzsche and Haeckel.
In cities like Berlin hardly a fifth of the inhabitants went to
church. But in Germany the Roman Church had special conditions.
Bismarck had switched off his attack on Catholicism from 1872 to
1881 and directed it to the Socialists, and he now had the
enthusiastic alliance of the Church. Some say that Socialism is a
crime, and some that it is folly, but the Church said that it is a
sin; which, of course, is much more likely to got men to avoid it.
The Catholics organized politically in a Center Party and a
Bavarian People's Party, and there was a very sharp line of
division between. Catholic votes and those of the sinful Socialists
and even worse Communists. Thirty years ago the Social Democratic
Federation dropped its official opposition to all Churches, on the
painfully familiar plea of Socialist leaders that this would
shorten the path to power, but this did not affect the
irreconcilable hostility between Socialists and Catholics. In fact,
when Communism in turn became a powerful force, as it did in
Germany, and in the Vatican policy Socialists and Communists were 
lumped together as Bolsheviks, the mutual antagonism was increased.

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               3

               HOW THE CROSS COURTED THE SWASTIKA

     I have earlier explained that in the very promising new phase
of German life between 1924 and 1930 the Catholics and Socialists
cooperated politically, and when Nazism grew they had another link
in hatred of their common enemy. Catholics for the first time rose
to the highest offices in the state. But the bishops knew, and
Pacelli who lived in Germany from 1917 to 1929 saw, that the
leakage from the Church was now disastrous. Before the 1914-1918
war the Catholic vote had already fallen, in spite of the high
Catholic birth rate. from one-fifth to one-sixth of the total
electorate, whereas Catholic writers like the Jesuit Father Krose
had estimated that by superior birth rate alone Catholics would
raise their percentage of the population by one percent every
decade. After the war their percentage, instead of rising, fell
steeply, though the masses of Catholic peasants and farmers
continued to have large families while the masses of non-Catholic
urban workers increasingly practiced birth control. It is enough to
quote the figures at the last democratic elections. In November
1932, when the last entirely free election was held, the combined
Catholic vote was 5,326,583 in a total of 35,000,000 votes or not
much more than one-seventh. In March, 1933, when Hitler was
Chancellor and there was a good deal of trickery and intimidation
-- but, we shall see, complete freedom for the Catholics -- the
Catholic vote was 5,496,054 in 39,316,873, or less than one-
seventh. Catholics who were represented in American literature as
one-third of the population could not in this supreme crisis get
one-seventh of the adult community. Their proportion would have
been even less if they had not had the energetic support of the
Jews against Hitler, as the Catholic Emil Ritter shows in his work
Der Weg des Politischen Katholizismus (1934). The Jews were ordered
by their rabbis to vote with the Catholics, and in Berlin the
Catholics ran a Jewish candidate.

     Now turn to the other side, At the time when the Church began
to fight the Socialists the latter could poll only 349,000 votes.
By 1907 the Socialist vote had risen to 3,010,800. The total number
of voters had doubled: the Socialist vote had increased ten-fold:
the Catholic vote had, taking into account the growth of
population, considerably decreased. But again it will be enough to
quote the final figures, just before the sun of freedom sank below
the horizon. In November, 1932, the Socialists and Communists
polled 13,712,292 votes, or much more than a third of the adult
community, Before the March election Goering's men had fired the
Reichstag to raise the Communist scare and, as Hitler was
Chancellor, Socialists and Communists were forbidden to hold
meetings and their papers suppressed, so the Communist vote fell
considerably and the Socialist vote slightly. Yet the two parties
still cast 12,321,684 votes, or moire than twice as many as the
combined (and free) Catholic parties and nearly a third of the
whole. The Nazis, I may add, even in the final election, with the
help of the Communist scare, the Pope's blessing -- as we shall see
-- and corrupt tactics, did not get one-half of the total vote
(17,265,823 votes out of 39,316,873). Germany never voluntarily
accepted Hitler. His party took power because it was the largest of
ten.





                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               4

               HOW THE CROSS COURTED THE SWASTIKA

     The glibness with which works of reference continue year after
year to say that Catholics in Germany are one-third of the 
population, or 25,000,000 out of 75,000.000, make the German puzzle
worse than ever for most people. How could a group of men who set
out upon one of the most colossal aggressive enterprises in history
begin by defying and persecuting one-third of the nation in
addition to a savage repression of the still larger body of
Socialists and Communists? Why are all our experts (or oracles)
convinced that the overwhelming majority of the German people
support Hitler yet pay respectful attention to the shrieks of men
like the late Cardinal Mundelein that the Catholic third of the
nation is bitterly persecuted?

     The truth is plainly shown in the above figures. As late as
the November election of 1932 -- we shall see presently what
happened after it -- the Catholic hierarchy was violently opposed
to Socialism and Communism as well as to Hitler and insisted on
Catholics voting for Catholic candidates. This was easy in Germany,
where the main body of the Catholics is found in certain provinces
where they form the great majority of the community. On this
occasion, moreover, the appeal of the bishop to their flocks was
the most urgent and solemn since Bismarck had fought the Church 60
years earlier. Is it seriously suggested that any large proportion
of genuine Catholics voted, in so grave a crisis, either for the
Socialists or for the bunch of apostates who, their leaders said,
were just as anxious as the Socialists to abolish the Church? If
you want to make an allowance for invalids and other possibilities
remember that on the other hand the Catholics had the support of
half a million Jews, who were too scattered to have their own
candidates. In the circumstance's the voting figures give us a much
safer indication of the truth than any statements of writers.

     These figures show that in 1932 Catholics were 13 percent, not
33 percent, of the adult community. A desperate apologist might
suggest that in Germany, differently from in other countries, the
young are more religious than the older folk and this would give
the Church a larger total than the election figure's suggest. Such
an apologist would have to be very ignorant of German conditions.
In Great Briton, priests publicly admit that in many towns 50
percent of the boys quit the Church when they leave the school. And
in Britain the atmosphere is not quite as poisonous for the young,
from the Church angle, as in Nazi Germany. You have heard of the
Strength through Joy movement, but you may not have heard how
youths have a song with the refrain, "On the heath and in the
meadows I lose my Strength through Joy," how working girls sing on
the streets a hymn to Mary which suggests -- I forget the exact
words -- that her name was probably Cohen and her baby was born on
the wrong side of the blanket. But suppose we take a generous view.
Thirteen percent of the nation in 1932 meant about 12,000,000
Catholics. Make what allowance you like for absenteeism from the
polls (though every possible voter was whipped up) or other
factors, but you cannot raise that figure to 15,000,000, which is
only half what the Pope claims.

     And it is admitted that since 1932 the Church has suffered
further and catastrophic losses. The organization which held the
Catholic body together is torn to shreds. Think of the numerous 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               5

               HOW THE CROSS COURTED THE SWASTIKA

societies (Knights of Columbus, Daughters of Mary, etc.) which in
America are extremely important in keeping the faithful loyal and
docile to the clergy. They are all suppressed in Germany. The two
political parties are dissolved. The Catholic press, the supreme
instrument of the clergy, is ruined. "All that remains of the one-
time great Catholic press of Germany," said the Vatican Radio in
March (1941), "are a few parish magazines, and even these have to
be edited with the greatest care." All Catholic schools in the
Catholic provinces have been closed and all the charitable and
other institutions which were one of the chief advertisements of
the Church have been taken over. All religious brothers, nuns,
etc., have been ignominiously expelled from education and every
Catholic child knows from its Nazi playmates that this is said to
be on account of a discovery of a plague of some kind of shameful
wickedness amongst them. A ghastly reproach has been put upon the
whole by jailing thousands of them for moral turpitude and
seduction of the young. Then there is the economic pressure, as
good jobs must be got from Nazi bosses, the social pressure, and so
on. There cannot be more than 10,000,000 Catholics in Germany
today, and that means a loss of at least 15,000,000, if not
20,000,000. The Catholic author of a special article in the London
Daily Express (November 15, 1939) the most widely circulated paper
in the world said that by 1936 priests in the Rhineland admitted
that they had lost half their flocks and added that "if the Nazis
remain in power another decade Roman Catholicism may be obliterated
from Germany." That is stronger language than I have used.

     Any man who finds this difficult to understand may reflect on
the following experience. A friend of mine, a person of high
character and a Catholic by baptism, went in 1937 to pay a
prolonged visit to relatives and friends in the Rhineland, his old
home. Everywhere he found the Catholics speaking with genial
disdain both of the Nazis and the Church. It was a mainly Catholic
district, and when my friend asked what they thought of the charges
of vice against the monks they laughingly replied that they had
always had a suspicion about life in those institutions. Catholic
belief, in other words, was never so deep amongst them as Catholic
writers pretend. They just wanted to be left alone to drink and
feed and smoke in the way of their fathers. How are such folk
likely to have fared under the pressure of the last five years?

     However that may be, stupendous losses are, as I said,
admitted. And these losses are the key to the Vatican policy in
Germany. It is to check them and to recover ground that, in spite
of one deception after another, the Vatican has ordered German
Catholics to submit and has tried year after year to enter into
alliance with Hitler. That is why the Pope in spite of his discreet
letters of sympathy to Queen Wilhelmina and King Leopold and his
protests against the ghastly attempts to annihilate the Poles after
they had been conquered, never uttered one word of straight moral
condemnation of any one of the long series of cynical breaches of
treaties, ruthless aggressions, and foul treatment of subject
peoples by which the Nazi government has roused against itself the
anger and disgust of the whole free world except its Catholic
allies. That terrible indictment I will proceed to justify point by
point.



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               6

               HOW THE CROSS COURTED THE SWASTIKA

                           Chapter 11


                     THE POPE JOINS THE GANG


     We saw that two grave dilemmas confronted Pacelli when, in
1930, he became Secretary of State to the late Pope and took over
the supreme control of the international policy of the Vatican.
There was an acrid quarrel with Mussolini over the terms of the
Treaty and Concordat he had signed and a request from Japan that
the Papacy should recognize its annexation of Manchuria, which the
conscience of the civilized world condemned. We saw how he resolved
these dilemmas. He linked the Church firmly to two partners of the
criminal Conspiracy; which would come to be known as the Axis. He
had hardly accomplished this, when the third problem arose. Hitler,
doubtless encouraged by the holy alliance with Italy and Japan,
sent an emissary to ask for recognition of his share in the brewing
plot against civilization. He got it. The Black International
joined the gang.

     When you sum up events in this bold fashion many folk shake
their heads skeptically, so, although in the mad rush of life in
our time it seems almost to be ancient history -- it is less than
ten years old -- I must briefly repeat the evidence of what
happened in 1932. Remember that Pacelli knew Germany thoroughly. He
had left it, after twelve years close observation of its life, in
1929, and his new office as Secretary of State compelled him to
watch carefully the critical course of events in that country.

     Bitterly as he hated Socialism, because he expected it
everywhere sooner or later to turn to the Russian model and declare
religion "the opium of the people," he was fully aware that in face
of the Nazi threat and in view of the distress which the world-
slump and the sudden cessation of loans had brought upon the
country the Catholics were cooperating with the Socialists under a
Catholic Chancellor, Bruning, and later the Catholic General von
Schleicher. Bruning was a shrewd opportunist who leaned to the
Right or the Left as occasion required, but he was a good
statesman. As long as he held together the coalition of Liberals,
Catholics, Jews, Socialists, and Communist the Nazi's had no chance
of success. It was in very large part the Vatican that ruined this
defense and the leadership of Bruning by forcing him away from the
Socialists and patronizing the Nazis.

     That Pacelli was guilty of a criminal blunder must be
admitted. He knew that Hitler had already given proof of his
duplicity and of his infamous intentions but like Mussolini, he
gambled on the success of Nazi militarism and the spinelessness of
the democracies. All the world now knows how first the German
industrialists, headed by Thyssen and Hagenberg, brought their
millions to the Nazi treasury and used every means in their power
to influence their Liberal and Radical workers in Hitler's favor.
The new Nazi Party emerged from as slimy a mess of intrigue and
deception as one can imagine. Hitler had won a large body of the
workers -- the Nazi group had started as a semi-Socialist working-
class movement, pure and simple -- by promising to improve their 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               7

               HOW THE CROSS COURTED THE SWASTIKA

condition at the expense of "the bloated capitalist." By 1931
Hitler welcomed the gold of the capitalist -- and any other gold
that came along -- and sold his semi-Socialism. Ambassador Dodd,
who was then in Berlin, describes in his Diary how he saw the
royalists and land-owners as well as the industrialists buzzing
round the Nazi headquarters.

     Hitler double-crossed them all. He took their money and rose
in November, 1932, to the electoral strength which I have
described. In 1930 the Nazi vote had been one-sixth of the whole.
In 1932 it was one-third. But they had used up all their resources
and were very dejected. They could get no more from the Liberals
and Conservatives and they could not approach the Socialists and
Communists, however ready they were to sell what soul they had to
the devil. What about the Catholics?

     Von Papen was the queerest figure in the bunch of Nazi
leaders. His Catholic standing was such that he received a high
decoration from the Vatican -- he is a Chamberlain of the Papal
Court -- and he was a friend of the very conservative President
Hindenburg and the Prussian aristocrats. In the summer of 1932 he
had, through his influence with Hindenburg, got the Chancellorship
away from Bruning, though he had in turn soon lost it to the
Catholic General von Schleicher. Note carefully that Germany thus
had three Catholic Chancellors (Premiers) in succession, an honor
of which they had not hitherto dreamed, under the Liberal-Socialist
coalition, which Pacelli helped to destroy in favor of the Nazis.
Von Schleicher, in close touch with the German hierarchy, adopted
an even more pronounced policy of cooperation with the Socialists
against the Nazis than Bruning had followed. With their support he
dared to publish the fact that the aristocratic Prussian land-
owners had shamelessly dipped into the public funds, and Von Papen
easily persuaded Hindenburg to protect their noble caste by
dismissing Von Schleicher and making Hitler Chancellor. He would
now control the next election; and the greasy Goering would do
dirty work in the country for him.

     About the same time, the beginning of 1933, Von Papen was sent
to Rome to propose an alliance with the Vatican. It is quite stupid
to affect to dispute these statements because Von Papen in a
published speech (Der 12 November, 1933, p. 7), which I have read,
actually boasts of his work. On November 9, 1933, he made this
speech to a very large audience of Catholic working men at Cologne,
speaking as one Catholic to others and rousing them to support
Hitler. He said, unctuously: "Providence destined me to render an
essential service in the birth of the government of the national
regeneration." As his bosom friends, Hitler and Goebbels, were
apostates and half the secondary leaders were notoriously
sodomists, I do not wonder that folk find this chapter of German
history perplexing, but that Von Papen did in fact propose to
Pacelli, in Hitler's name, that he should order the German
Catholics to drop their hostility to the Nazis in return for, when
they attained power, a favorable Concordat with the Church --
during his twelve years in Germany Pacelli had tried in vain to get
this -- and that Pacelli accepted is abundantly proved, and most
clearly by the subsequent course of events.



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               8

               HOW THE CROSS COURTED THE SWASTIKA

     Early in 1933 the statement was widely repeated. in the German
Press that the bishops, meeting at Fulda, had received instructions
from Rome to abandon the hostility to Hitler and had passed these
on to the clergy. It is further stated in all histories of the time
that in preparation for the March election only Catholics and Nazis
were allowed to organize and appeal to the country. See, in
particular, the account, which will certainly not be accused of
anti-Catholic bias, in Seldes (The Vatican). He adds that one of
the Catholic clerical leaders, Msgr. Kaas, was sent to Rome to
advise Pacelli to agree and that he said of Hitler: "This man, the
bearer of high ideal's, will do all that is necessary to save the
nation from catastrophe."

     I gather that there were already some in the German Church who
were in favor of alliance with Hitler. A few years later one of the
most important priests in Munich died and his funeral was
officially honored by the Nazi government; and in the heat of the
later struggle, when many German Catholics blamed Cardinal
Faulhaber, head of their Church, the Valerist paper, the Irish
Independent (August 13, 1938), which was in close touch with the
clergy, said that "Cardinal Faulhaber was very friendly to National
Socialism in the beginning" -- in other words, until Hitler double-
crossed the Vatican. Hitler had by this time begun to wash out any
suspicion that he would, if returned to power, injure the Church.
In one of his first speeches in the Reichstag, on March 23, 1933,
he said that "as we see in Christianity the unshakable foundation
of the moral life so it is our duty to continue to cultivate
friendly relations with the Holy See and to develop them."

     The great majority in the Church could not so easily reconcile
themselves to cooperation with a disreputable bunch of apostates
and sodomists, and there were many complaints in the Catholic press
when the bishops circulated the Papal order to observe at least
benevolent neutrality. The terms of the order are, of course, not
known but we may gather them from the result. The Annual Register
for 1933, says, in recording Hitler's triumph at the election: "The
gigantic swing-over of the Catholic middle-class in West and South
Germany to the Nazi Party broke the power of the old middle-class
Catholic parties, the Center and the Bavarian People's Party" (p.
169). The word "gigantic" will seem misplaced if you look back upon
the electoral statistics I have given. The Catholic vote fell but
not so heavily. But note that the writer is referring only to the
middle class, and it is significant that the Catholic vote fell
even by 20,000 when every party feverishly whipped all its
supporters to the poll.

     It is, at all events, another witness to the change of
attitude of the Catholics under ecclesiastical direction, and a
fourth, and still more important witness, is a French priest
writing later in the French Catholic fortnightly, the Revue des
Deux Mondes (January 15, 1935, article "Le catholicisme et la
politique mondiale") and boasting of it as one of the diplomatic
triumphs of the Vatican.

     But surely these witnesses are superfluous in view of the
acknowledged fact that on July 20, 1933, Pacelli proudly signed the
Concordat he had arranged with the Nazis. Does anybody suppose that


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               9

               HOW THE CROSS COURTED THE SWASTIKA

the Nazis' who are now represented as from the start a horde of
irreligious blackguards, went out of their way after they had won
their triumph, to promise Rome that they would respect rights which
it claimed and that were drastically opposed to their principles?
The man who writes history on suspicions and assumptions, cannot
complain if his readers are skeptical, but the apologist who
suggests such things as this must have readers who are incapable of
ordinary judgment. Hitler's aim was to form a totalitarian state in
the most literal sense: a state in which every implement of
instruction or mind-forming should be used by Nazi officials to
instil racial pride and a readiness for aggressive war. Yet the
first thing he does after securing power is to promise a Church
which he hates that it shall control the education of millions of
children, continue to have a press that is pledged to
internationalism and peace, and draft its members into societies
and fraternities for the cult of a Jewish Bible and a Gospel of
Peace. He was carrying out a bargain; but one that he never had the
least intention of honoring in practice.

     We no more say that the Black International put Hitler in
power than we say that it caused the war. We will not even linger
to consider how much influence the Papal policy had amongst the
various corrupt factors that put him in power. The point is that
the Cross embraced the Swastika: the Pope joined the Gang. The
Vatican sold its position as international moral censor as
shamefully as it had sold it to the other partners of the Axis.
Incredible? Then let the apologist quote any Papal condemnations of
the appalling crimes against humanity and civilization that have
been committed every year since Hitler seized power. I decline to
count mild protests against actions which injured the Church.

     The world, bemused by a press which could see nothing in the
future except "the menace of Bolshevism," took little notice of
this at the time. But let it not now be suggested that perhaps
Pacelli himself understood Nazism no more than the majority of
folk. After twelve years in Germany for the single purpose of
studying developments! A few years later editors began to profess
that they wished they could penetrate the secret of Nazi policy. It
was tragicomic. The substantial part of Hitler's program -- it was
expanded when he saw the criminal sluggishness of Fiance and
Britain -- had been for years in Mein Kamph. In 1938 I put in the
form of a program, in Hitler's own words, statements of his aims
which are scattered over, and often repeated in, that immense flood
of twaddle. It will be of use if I reproduce the main part of it
here.

     "We must see that the strength of our people has, its roots,
not in colonies, but in land of our own in Europe (p. 754). The
regaining of our lost provinces cannot be achieved by solemn
appeals to God as pious hopes but only by force of arms (708). The
South Tyrol and our lost provinces can be won back only by a bloody
struggle (708). The most sacred right in the world is the right to
land that you can till yourself and the holiest sacrifice is the
blood you shed for it (755). Our policy in the East [Russia] must
be that we will win more land for the German people. Since we need
strength for this, yet the mortal enemy of our people, France,
strangles us mercilessly, we must make every sacrifice that is 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               10

               HOW THE CROSS COURTED THE SWASTIKA

necessary to destroy the position of France in Europe (757). This
policy can be carried out only by an alliance with England (689).
There, is no English, American, or Italian statesman who was ever
pro-German. Any man who says that we can form alliances with
foreign nations in virtue of a pro-German spirit in the leading
statesmen of those countries is either an ass or a liar (698). The
alliance with England and Italy will enable Germany to make its
case, under the shelter of such a coalition, all the preparations
that are needed for a final settlement with France (755)."

     There, written nearly twenty years ago, is the whole program
of duplicity, callousness, and aggression. As the current
"translation" of Mein Kampf, subsidized by the Nazi government, was
grossly fraudulent. I translated these sentences, which are
expanded and justified at great length in the work, from the 1935
(mature) edition, and sent them to two editors of radical London
papers, with a circulation of about 4,000,000 copies, who professed
to be puzzled about Hitler's intentions.  Both refused to print my
article, and Britain slumbered and blundered on.

     If any man supposes that Pacelli and the Vatican did not know
the contents of Mein Kampf, which already circulated by the
million, he must have a singularly low estimate of the ability with
which their work is conducted. Before Pacelli put his pen to
parchment the Day of the Long Knife, about which Nazi youth's had
sung chants all over Germany for two years, occurred. More than
100,000 Jews, Communists, Socialists, Pacifists, etc., were
barbarously treated and robbed of their possessions and in many
cases their lives. Pacelli amiably continued to work out the
details of his compact with the devil, and the church bells rang
when it was signed. And the German bishops deputed Cardinal Bertram
to assure Hitler that they were "glad to express as soon as
possible" their joy at the agreement and their "sincere readiness
to cooperate to their best ability with the new government" (the
Catholic Universe, August 18, 1933). Hitler's followers, especially
the notorious pervert Roehm and his friends, scorned the concordat
and insulted the Church, and infringements of the agreement began
at once. But when Catholic writers say that Cardinal Faulhaber at
once took a firm stand against the Nazi they gravely mislead their
reader's.

     The sermons which Faulhaber delivered can be read in an
English translation Judaism, Christianity, and Germany, 1933). They
are a painful exhibition of moral cowardice and sycophancy. I have
already quoted the Valerist organ saying that Faulhaber was
favorable to Nazism "in the beginning." It adds that "the fact that
he found it impossible later not to oppose certain elements of
their policy, hurt us as well as annoyed them." What were these
elements? Did he, as a Catholic prelate professes to regard as his
duty, censure Hitler for his perjury in violating his solemn oath
to preserve the Constitution? Did he denounce the brutality of the
attack on Jews and Socialists? Not a word. His attack was purely
theological. The Anti-Semitic language of the Nazis was opposed to
the Catholic doctrine that the Old Testament was inspired and that
Jehovah was the God of Christianity and was incarnated in the Jew
Jesus. The Nazis laughed at him. Rosenberg, who had at that time
some idea that because I admired pre-Nazi Germany I could be won to
support them, sent me a copy of his drastic reply.

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               11

               HOW THE CROSS COURTED THE SWASTIKA

     In the preceding book I said that Pacelli at this time wrote
the most severe attack on Hitler that ever carne from a Papal
source. He was engaged in his mission -- not a "good will" mission
but arranging a bloody Fascist reaction -- in South America. From
there he sent to Cardinal Schulte at Cologne a letter in which he
roused German Catholics against the Nazi leaders. "When in Satanic
pride, false prophets arise, pretending to be the bearers of a new
creed," he said, it behooved the faithful to stir themselves, I
cannot trace that the Cardinal passed on the warning to his flock
but, in any case, what was the point of the attack?

     In June (1934) Hitler had surpassed his record of outrage to
date by the infamous Blood Purge in which Catholic leaders like
General von Schleicher and Strasser were murdered together with
Roehm and other notorious perverts. The excuse was a confused plea
that the party had to be morally purified and that there was a Plot
against Hitler. But whereas in the Russian executions, about which
the world press poured out streams of indignation, the conspiracy
was proved in open court after trials which distinguished foreign
lawyers declared unassailable, there was no pretense of a trial in
Germany. Hitler, already under the influence of the semi-insane
egoism that developed after his success, shouted "I am the law and
justice in Germany", and the men -- hundreds of them -- were shot
down in their houses or their cells! Was this what Pacelli
condemned? Not at all. He had heard that the Nazis were helping
Catholics who favored them to found in Germany a National Catholic
Church, acknowledging no obedience to Rome and finding room for
Nazi doctrines. Notice carefully that Pacelli denounces the Nazis
as "pretending to be the bearers of a new creed". So it was with
the protests of the German Catholic bishops which are quoted. They
protested against the increasing violations of the Concordat by
interference with their schools and their Catholic organizations.



                           Chapter III


                 HOW HE HELPED HITLER IN AUSTRIA


     We shall resume presently the revolting story of how the Pope,
with Pacelli at his elbow, helped Hitler to consolidate his power
in Germany but at this point it is necessary to turn aside and
consider what was happening in Austria. Bavaria is a sister-state
of Austria rather than of Prussia, and from Munich, its capitol,
Pacelli had watched very closely the development in the southern
Republic. It was of absorbing interest from the ecclesiastical
angle. Austria was the only country in the world where a Catholic
priest, Msgr. Seipel, a man of intense loyalty to the Vatican, had
supreme power. During fourteen year's after the war Seipel, a
professor of moral theology and a leader of the Christian Socialist
movement, was either himself Chancellor (President) or the power
behind the Chancellor. He represented the Church, for it at once
transpired that there was as much Socialism in Christian Socialism
as there is science in Christian Science.



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               12

               HOW THE CROSS COURTED THE SWASTIKA

     The state was thus a theocracy, the only one in the world
except Thibet, and as such of profound interest to every Vatican
official. This interest was all the greater from the fact that,
while the state was Catholic, its capitol, Vienna, was Socialist
and Atheistic. Socialism and Communism had made the same progress
in Austria after the war and the expulsion of the emperor as they
had made in Germany. In Vienna, Linz, and other industrial towns
the Socialists had outvoted the Catholics and Liberals in the
municipal elections and had won control and carried out their
principles in a civic policy. Two features of their rule must be
noted.

     The first is that the Austrian Socialists were emphatically
anti-Catholic. The well-known amiability (Gutmuthlichkeit) of the
Austrian character saved them from the worst libels of Bolsheviks
that were served upon the world-press, but the fierce hostility to
them of the Church, which made fruitless constitutional efforts to
capture Vienna, hardened their attitude to it. Here every vote cast
for Socialist or a Communist was sternly pronounced a vote against
the Church. "Even to this day," says C.A. Macartney, a
distinguished and conservative scholar of Rambridge University,
"the real battle of Austrian Socialism is directed against the
Church" (The Social Revolution in Austria, 1926, p. 54). And the
Socialists continued to win, large numbers from the Church year
after year and to gain ground in the country. At the 1927 election
they polled 830,000 votes outside Vienna and increased their vote
in Vienna by 120,000. Is it a mere coincidence that in that year
the Christian Socialist government began to resort to persecution
and violence?

     The second feature was of no interest at all to churchmen but
ought to have been -- and was not -- frankly described in the
press. It is that while Austria as a whole under its clerical
'statesmen' was so badly administered that the League of Nations
had to step in periodically to save it from bankruptcy, Vienna, in
spite of the heavy depression caused by the mutilation of the
country at Versailles, effected a very remarkable social
improvement. I was in Vienna when it took 500 Kronen -- a Krone
used to be worth 50c -- to buy a small apple, and a very small
cake, or the cheapest postage stamp, and half the workers were so
near "starving" that, the police told me, civil war was feared. Yet
after years of this, and still seriously crippled economically,
Vienna made extraordinary progress in education, housing, and other
social reforms. I have described it elsewhere and need say here
only that every impartial social student in Europe acknowledged it.
Macartriey says that in a few months the Socialist Municipal
Council "did more to better the condition of the masses than had
previous decades of legislation from above": Catholic legislation,
you understand, A London daily which is opposed to Socialism said
of this Socialist administration after the Catholics had
treacherously destroyed it that it had been "a model of democratic
government, as close to the ideal platonic Republic as the world
has ever seen" (News-Chronicle, February 12, 1935).

     The British editor was wrong on one point. Vienna was not
closer to the ideal Republic than Moscow, and Madrid and (with
reserves on account of the mass of illiteracy) Mexico City were 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               13

               HOW THE CROSS COURTED THE SWASTIKA

approaching it under Socialist rule. If it seems rash to claim that
this was of no interest from the ecclesiastical angle you have only
to reflect on the facts. Had the Vatican, indeed in this case
Catholics throughout the world, given any consideration to the
actual social fruits of Bolshevism when from 1935 onward they
shrieked for its extinction in Russia, Spain, and Mexico? The laity
were obviously ignorant of the truth. Their Catholic press never
mentioned countries or cities under Socialist rule except to repeat
the most venomous libels about their social condition. Were the
higher clergy equally ignorant? If you can suppose that they were,
you have to conclude that they were blind to every issue but one --
the wealth and power of the Black International.

     As I have written at length elsewhere, particularly in the
Appeal to Reason Library No. 5., on the development in Austria I
sum up the events briefly, with the addition of a few details that
have since transpired. The most important of these additions is
that we have now to review all these events since 1930 in the light
of Pacelli's scheme to have Socialism destroyed by alliance with
anti-Socialist powers, however criminal and unsavory they might be.
In 1934 his plan was not fully developed. He saw Socialism spread
in Germany but the destructive power was still almost below the
political horizon when he left the country. He saw it spread, with
devastating consequences to the Catholic missions, in China, and he
linked the Papacy with Japan. He saw it in South America and went
there to bring the Church and the wealthy to a practical agreement.
He saw it in Mexico but, for lack of definite evidence, we do not
say that in his visit to the States he encouraged the idea of a
beautiful Catholic-Wall-Street alliance. He saw it in Spain and
promoted the slowly maturing plot to destroy it. He saw it in
Russia, but until 1936 he still dreamed of a friendly alliance with
the Soviet authorities, and it was only when he definitely
abandoned this hope that he gave the Church the slogan: Extinguish
Bolshevism in Russia, China, Mexico and Spain. It was already
extinct, with his assistance, in Germany and Italy.

     In 1933 his plans were still piecemeal, and Austria was the
next obvious, province for his intrigues. By this time it was
evident that in a field of fair propaganda and free discussion the
Socialists won every time, and it could not plausibly be said in
the case of Austria, as it was lyingly said of Italy and Germany,
that Socialism led to distress and disorder. The only serious
criticism I have seen of the fine social work done in Vienna is
that it was financed by foreign loan's which were advanced for a
different purpose. That is false The city council at Vienna never
received any part of the advances. They went to the Christian
Socialist government, which means in large part to the Church.
Vienna paid its way by taxes and a financial system of great
ability.

     There was a special difficulty in the case of Austria: the
mutual jealousy of Mussolini and Hitler, who still hated and
distrusted each other and each wanted control of Austria. The
Vatican favored Italy, especially as before the end of 1933 Hitler
betrayed his duplicity and Austria was predominantly Catholic. In
1931 the Pope, assisted by Pacelli, had issued an Encyclical to the
effect that the Italian corporative state was (especially as it 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               14

               HOW THE CROSS COURTED THE SWASTIKA

bowed to Canon Law, put education under the Church, and heavily
subsidized the clergy) the model for Catholic countries. The
corporative state meant, of course, the destruction of Socialism
and Trade Unions, the workers being drafted into corporations under
the firm hand of Church and State, and the recognition of the
capitalists right of private property (or all the wealth he could
make) with a right of the state to conscript such of the wealth as
it needed. Portugal had adopted the scheme, as France and Spain
have since done.

     Hitler, though he affected to despise the Austrians, was by no
means willing to see it pass under Italian influence or, as the
Catholics wanted, restore the imperial rule, but he was not yet in
a position to force a bargain upon Mussolini. As I quoted, he had
written long before this in Mein Kampf that Germans must win back
by force of arms even the South Tyrol from Italy, which had been
awarded it, at Versailles. This meant the annexation of Austria. He
cynically watched the Church coquetting in Austria with Italian
Fascism. If they chose to destroy Socialism for him, so much the
better. And Socialism was, in spite of its steady progress, doomed
from 1927. It not only mocked the financial ineptness of the
national government but it brought to light a series of grave
scandals in connection with the government and its supporters.
Seipel rallied to his support all the industrialists and landowners
and looked round for a knight in shining armor like Mussolini or
Hitler.

     Prince Starhemberg, a conceited puppy of the type of Ciano or
Suner, but a wealthy noble, chose himself for the part. By Seipel's
treacherous connivance and with Italian assistance he was allowed
to create a private Fascist army, the Heimwehr -- "created in its
final form by Seipel," says the Annual Register, and Seipel did
nothing independently of the Vatican -- which very obviously
intended to attack the Socialists and Communists. In fact,
Starhemberg provoked a clash prematurely, but the Catholic
government had so small a majority in the Reichsrath that it was
beaten. Seipel was driven from the Chancellorship and streams of
Austrians quitted the Church (1933).

     Seipel and the Church put into the Chancellorship a priest-
ridden little man of peasant extraction and no particular ability
whom the American press came to glorify as "gallant little
Dollfuss." You may remember how he "stood up to Hitler"; though it
was not clearly explained at the time that in resisting Nazism he
was defending Fascism. In his first budget as Chancellor he
admitted a deficit of $70,000,000, a colossal sum for so small a
state and after all the loans, and he rarely had a majority of more
than one in Congress. The railway-men, who were very largely
Socialists, disclosed the fact that, against international
agreement, he was allowing Italy to use Austrian railroads to send
arms secretly into Hungary; which also Italy and the Vatican wanted
to make Fascist and allied to Italy. Dollfuss solemnly assured
France and Britain that the traffic should cease, but he secretly
maintained it, and the Socialists again exposed it. So "the
Socialist watch-dog had to be destroyed." That is the language of
the Annual Register in its impartial summary of the events of 1933.



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               15

               HOW THE CROSS COURTED THE SWASTIKA

     Dollfuss went to Rome and had long talks with Mussolini and
Pacelli; with, incidentally, a talk to the Almighty in St. Peters.
You will, of course, not for a moment suspect that he discussed
with Pacelli the plot to destroy Austrian Socialism. The Church
never interferes in polities. But the course of the events that
followed the return of Dollfuss to Vienna clearly shows that this
second step in Hitler's march to world-domination was facilitated,
like the first, by the Black International. And in order to avoid
all suspicion of the use of tainted sources I will give a short
summary of these events as they are described, objectively, in the
Annual Rdgister, which certainly does not lean to Socialism or
Atheism.

     Before he had set out for Rome Dollfuss had given a solemn
engagement (his second) to France that he would take no action
against the Socialists for disclosing the Hungarian-Italian
traffic. France and Britain feared Civil war in Austria and were
assured that all parties would be forbidden to store arms. They
were probably aware that both parties were collecting arms, but
while the Fascist Heimwehr was encouraged and made no secret of its
armament, the government took every measure to hamper the
Socialists, who had to store arms very secretly in their model
tenement-blocks. On his return, however, Dollfuss, the idol of the
clergy, disowned his solemn engagements and assumed dictatorial
powers. Mussolini had promised to see him through.

     He closed the Reichsrath (Congress) and announced that Austria
was to be "a corporative authoritative state." He suspended the
Mayor of Vienna and abolished the municipal government or paralyzed
it by cutting off its financial resources. He allowed Starhemberg's
army to take over provincial towns and to show itself openly in
Vienna. There is, in fact, evidence that agents of the Heimwehr
offered to sell pieces of artillery to the Socialists in order to
encourage them to rebel. It wits obvious that they were very
seriously threatened with extinction, but the prospect of success
against the government and the Heimwehr (which had artillery), with
Mussolini in the background, was so poor that there was no
agreement on a plan of revolt when the Catholic Fascists put into
circulation a report that they were in a few days going to enter
the blocks of workers tenements in search of the hidden arms and
Dollfuss publicly supported the Heimwehr, large numbers of the
Socialists and the Communists decided to fight. Dollfuss lied to
the world about the struggle he had provoked. He announced that 137
men, women, and children were killed. The number was at least 1500.
Eleven of the leaders were executed and 1188 men and women were
imprisoned; and many of these prisoners testified in court that
they were tortured in jail in the traditional and almost invariable
fashion of clerical counter-revolutions. So sordid was this chapter
of Catholic history from beginning to end that the impartial writer
in the Annual Register (1934, p. 194) concludes his account in
these ironic words:

     "At the cost of hundreds if not thousands of lives . . . the
Heimwebr Fascist movement, which was created in its final form by
the late Chancellor Msgr. Ignaz Seipel, achieved in 1934 its oft-
proclaimed aim of the destruction of the Social Democratic Party,
their violent ejection from the control of Vienna to which two-


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               16

               HOW THE CROSS COURTED THE SWASTIKA

thirds of the people had elected them, and the sweeping away of
parliamentary government in Austria. Thus culminated the anti-
Socialist policy inaugurated by the late Msgr. Seipel in 1926."

     Seipel had died in 1922, and "gallant little Dollfuss" had,
after a visit to the Vatican, carried his policy to its logical
conclusion. Whatever difficulty we may have in some cases in
tracing the intrigues of the Black International there is none
here. The struggle was ecclesiastical. It was directed by priests
and aimed at restoring the power of the Church from beginning to
end. Pacelli had won his first campaign in his war for the
extinction of Bolshevism.

     The Socialists had taken the chief part in the revolution of
1919 against Church and State. It had been, a Socialist historian
says, "the most peaceful and the most humane of all revolutions,"
for the successful republicans "had not hurt a hair of anybody's
head." The only error of this writer is his claim that it was a
unique revolution in its humanity. Five democratic revolutions in
Spain during the nineteenth century. several in Italy and Portugal,
and all the revolutions of 1848 had had the same character; and the
Spanish revolution of 1932 had lived up to the democratic
tradition. And the treachery and truculence of the clerical
counter-revolution of 1934 had followed the model of all such
movements. Yet journalists and essayists everywhere continued to
speak of the Reds as dangerously prone to violence and the Church
as the world's noblest guardian of peace, humanity, and justice.
Who are the real Reds?

     The Church followed up its victory with the customary
inhumanity. All funds and buildings belonging to the workers were
confiscated, and the arbitrary arrests of Socialists continued. By
the beginning of 1937 there were 24,000 political prisoners,
largely men and women who had had no trial, in the jails of
Austria. In that year Miss Margery Fry, a very sane and respected
British prison-reformer, Wm. Rackham of Cambridge University, and
Professor Kimberg, a high authority on prisons, traveled over
Europe on a tour of inspection. They were not permitted in any
country to see how political prisoners were treated, and were not
allowed to visit any jails in Austria, Italy, Germany, and
Portugal. But they brought back and told in the British press a
horrible story of overcrowded jails in Hungary, Rumania, Bulgaria,
and Yugo-Slavia, of the use of torture and brutality by jailers and
police, of semi-starvation and cruel conditions, of tens of
thousands who had never had any sort of trial. On the very day on
which I write this a cautious Liberal British paper (News
Chronicle, September 25, 1941), describes just such brutality in
Spanish jails today. And the world-press still refused to see in
these things the shadow of things to come.

     That was the new situation in Austria: overcrowded jails,
refusal of trials, torture, and brutality by Catholic jailers. And
over it all the Church waved its blessing. Cardinal Innitzer issued
a special address to the workers, saying that their Holy Mother the
Church affectionately welcomed them back to the fold. There was not
much tenderness about the process, for the Church at once set up an
intolerable tyranny. Every government employee must attend church 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               17

               HOW THE CROSS COURTED THE SWASTIKA

regularly or be fired. Every teacher must go to confession at least
once in three weeks. The splendid system of education which, to the
admiration of the educational world, the Socialists had created was
destroyed and text books of the most mendacious Catholic type were
substituted. Socialist efficiency was replaced by Catholic-Fascist
inefficiency. Though the worst of the world-depression had now
passed. Austria fell into a condition of semi-famine, and the
priests used even this for their purposes. The Annual Register
tells us that the priests at first refused all foreign aid so as to
"force those in distress to apply to Catholic organizations", and
two Englishmen were arrested for giving money to starving people.
Fifty out of sixty seats on the State Cultural Council were
allotted to Catholics.

     How Pacelli must have rubbed his hands! So did Hitler. On the
ruins of the Socialist-Communist movement the Nazis of Austria
quickly grew in power. They murdered Dollfuss, whom the priests
replaced with the unhappy and purblind Schuschnigg. Hitler drew
nearer to Mussolini and bought off his interest in Austria by
promising him, with his usual brazen dishonesty, that be should not
only have Savoy, Coisica, and Tunis from France and Dalmatia from
Yugo-Slavia but he should continue to be the dominant power in
Hungary and in all countries south of the Danube. That suited
Pacelli. The Catholics of Austria added to the Catholics of Germany
would give the Vatican a stronger hand in its new deals with the
Nazis, and there might be a glorious bloc of Catholic powers from
Portugal (when the new revolution was accomplished in Spain) to
Bulgar. If I were a man of pinity I should be disposed to quote the
old Latin adage: Those whom God wishe's to destroy he first makes
mad. The destruction of Socialism in Austria and enslavement of the
whole country to Cardinal Innitzer was a most beneficent removal of
obstacles to Hitler's annexation of the country. To this and the
share of the Black International in it we will return later.



                           Chapter IV


             HITLER EXPOSES THE SHAME OF THE CHURCH


     Pacelli had soon repented of the hasty attack on Hitler which
he had sent from South America to Cardinal Schulte. Apart from weak
complaints that the Nazis did not observe the Concordat and a
sharper note when he saw the Gestapo men annihilating his treasured
Polish Church by castration and other gentle Nazi methods, he has
never condemned Hitler. Certainly he has never condemned Nazi crime
and bestiality as such, though all the world recognizes that he had
a magnificent field for moral censorship. And his restraint, if you
like to call it that, was not due to any better observance of the
Concordat in Germany. On the contrary, Catholic schools and
associations were disappearing. But to challenge Hitler would lead
at once to more drastic treatment of the Church and he must try to
win a compromise.

 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               18

               HOW THE CROSS COURTED THE SWASTIKA

     An opportunity occurred in 1935. The rich Saar province had at
the Congress of Versailles been entrusted to the League of Nations
-- really to the exploitation of French industrialists -- for 15
years, and the time had now expired. The inhabitants were to vote
whether or no they would return to Germany. They were
overwhelmingly Catholic so that an issue that was of the greatest
possible importance to Hitler was to be decided by the Church; for
it would be preposterous to suggest that in so delicate a matter
the local hierarchy would act without instructions from the
Vatican. On January 6 the bishops of Speier and Trier, the heads of
the local Church, Issued a letter of instruction that was to be
read in every Catholic Church of the province. Whether or no you
call this interfering in politics they ordered their people to vote
for Hitler. "As German Catholics," they said, "it is out duty to
uphold the greatness, the Welfare, and the peace of our
Fatherland." On the following Sunday, 13th, the voting day, special
prayers were said after Mass for a victory for Hitler (London
Times, January 18). On the same day (18th) the Catholic Times
boasted that Hitler owed his triumph to the Catholics of the Saar,
and it remained to be seen how grateful he would prove. The bells
rang in every Catholic Church when the overwhelming vote in favor
of Hitler was announced; just as they had rung in every Church of
Italy for the triumph of Mussolini.

     Hitler made no change in his policy of ignoring the Concordat.
More Catholic schools and associations were closed, and Cardinal
Faulhaber vaguely threatened in one of his sermons to excommunicate
the Nazi leaders: not for their crimes, of course, but for
interfering with Catholic education. Hitler had directed that
Catholic parents in Munich should vote whether they wanted to send
their children to Catholic or to national schools. As a result of
the vote the pupils attending Catholic schools fell from 36,464 to
19,266, and the pupil's of Nazi schools rose from 33 to 65 percent
of the whole. Every priest knew that this meant further enormous
leakage from the Church.

     It must have put Pacelli in a painful dilemma when, soon after
this, Hitler demanded a vote of confidence from the entire country.
He had just, in defiance of France and the League of Nations, taken
a very serious step in the realization of his aggressive plan. He
had sent troops to occupy the Rhine provinces which by the terms of
the Treaty were to remain demilitarized. The German people were to
pronounce upon his entire policy: his crimes to date and the
aggressive campaign of which, as everybody knew, the defiance of
Versailles was the first clause.

     One would have thought that here was a fine opportunity to
take refuge in the worn cliche that the Church never interferes in
politic's, but the German hierarchy composed a letter that was to
be read in every Church before the vote was taken. It is one of the
many clerical masterpieces of improper advice masquerading as
evasion, which the last ten years have produced. The bishops
recognized the painful dilemma of the faithful. If they voted for
Hitler they might seem to approve of various "measures antagonistic
to the Church" which he had ordered. So they are free to vote as
they will. But if any of them care to vote for Hitler they could do
so with a clear conscience by saying to themselves: "We give our 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               19

               HOW THE CROSS COURTED THE SWASTIKA

vote to the Fatherland but that does not signify approval of
matters for which we could not conscientiously be held responsible"
(Catholic Times, March 27, 1936). In other words, Vote for Hitler.
We recognize the accents of Pacelli-Pius.

     The vote of confidence was a farce as such. The point of
interest is that the Black International which had helped to put
Hitler in the saddle in 1933 still supported him in spite of all
his outrages and his open menace to the world's peace. This was in
gratitude for favors to come, and it is one of the most acute
ironies of the time that while the priests were instructing the
Catholic laity in the moral acrobatics by which they could vote for
Hitler that most brazen of adventurers since Caesar Borgia was
actually at work on a measure that would deal the German Church and
the Papacy the most terrible blow they had suffered since Luther
had nailed his theses to the Church door at Wittenberg.

     This was the revelation that monasteries which were
represented in Catholic literature -- even in works that circulated
in America -- as fragrant gardens of piety and virtue were
cesspools of moral perversity and that the vice was widespread
amongst the parochial clergy. I have given an account of the early
stages of this exposure in the Haldeman-Julius booklet Vice in
German Monasteries (1937), which is, as far as I can ascertain, the
only lengthy account in the English language. Had so spectacular an
exposure, on so vast a scale, been made in regard to any other body
or Church than the Roman Catholic the press would have erupted into
its largest scare-type and its warmest moral indignation. Such is
the backstairs influence of the Black International in America and
Britain that journalists had to suppress, or publish lies about 
the greatest sensation of the year 1936. Here let me round off the
story and set it in the light of later disclosures.

     All that the great majority of Americans knew about the matter
was that Cardinal Mundelein of Chicago, as part of his indictment
of the Nazis for persecuting the Church -- which was itself
conducting a far worse persecution in Poland and Austria and soon
would be in Spain -- charged them with fabricating an atrocious
libel against the German clergy and said that of the 25,635 priests
of Germany only 58, or a quarter of 1 percent, had been arrested on
a vice-charge. This was a statement (which no one in America could
cheek) made by the German bishops, and it was an audacious evasion,
if not untruth. The B.U.P. and Reuter message which conveyed the
words of the bishops added, significantly, that "eleven Roman
Catholic priests were arrested in Munich this week-end" and told of
two other arrests for assaults on little girls a few days later.
The figure is preposterous but the implication is worse. The
"thousands" of offenders of whom the Nazis spoke were not priests.
They were monks or what the Catholic calls lay brothers.

     The difference is important. Priests in Germany as in America
have parochial duties, an important part of which is visiting homes
in the husband's absence and being visited by girls and women, like
ministers of other denominations. All of them have female domestic
servants in their houses. When they are disposed to violate their
vow of chastity they have ample opportunities, and of this sort of
indulgence the German law takes no more cognizance than the 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               20

               HOW THE CROSS COURTED THE SWASTIKA

American law does, as long as they do not seduce minors under their
charge. Their circumstances do not particularly incline them to
sodomy. It is in the monastic communings, especially of lay (or
non-priest) brothers, who are devoted to teaching and the care of
the sick, mentally feeble, etc., that the pretense of special
holiness breaks down. The word "monk" is not a technical but
popular word, and it is applied to these in Catholic literature.
The large communities and work of charity are particularly
recommended in Catholic literature as proof of the Church's
inspiration, and they and the nuns number, or numbered, ten's of
thousands in Germany. Those of the Franciscan Order were
particularly praised, and the largest community of them, at
Waldbreitbach, in Westphalia, were described as a holy institution
to which no other religion could show a parallel.

     It was just here, at Waldbreitbaeb and other Franciscan
communities, that the police were busy gathering evidence at the
very time when the bishops were telling Catholics to vote for
Hitler, and proof was accumulating that these holy places were not
only comprehensively but revoltingly corrupt. Father-confessors
seduced for years the young novices who came in. Monks confessed in
the witness-box how on the holiest days (when all monks feed and
drink most) they reeled along the corridors to the chapel and
halted in dark corners I have told all that from their own
confessions in court. There is nothing like it in Boccaccio or
Rabelais; and it had been going on for an indefinite time. There
had been prosecutions early in the century, but in those days one
quickly let the Catholic curtain fall again if it revealed anything
nasty.

     One point only must be repeated here. The charge that the
trials of the monks were travesties of justice, on a level with the
Berlin trial of the Communists for the burning of the Reichstag, is
entirely false. The public is apt to assume this, since the Nazi
variety of justice is notorious and the plain man has no means of
checking statements about Germany. But men like Mundelein or the
German-American priests who assisted him must have known better.
One such priest visited Germany to ascertain "the truth" in 1938
and lingering in Britain to communicate this personally ascertained
"truth" to the British press -- and Catholics, as usual, got
replies to him excluded from the press -- he returned in triumph to
America. His verdict was just what Mundelein said: Less than 60
priests in Germany had been prosecuted, and the rest was Nazi
fabrication. This priest knew that the German bishops from whom he
got his figure admitted the depravity in monasteries's of religious
brothers, that the Vatican also admitted it by suppressing whole
provinces of them for irregularity of conduct, and that the
Catholics of Germany fully admitted it.

     There can be very little doubt that Hitler directed the
prosecution. He knew that he had in this epidemic of vice a ground
that would go very far even in the eyes of Catholics to justify his
refusal to honor the terms of the Concordat he had signed. But he
also knew that he would give the bishops a means to stir the
Catholic body bitterly against him instead of winning its support
unless such charges were proved beyond cavil. He took care that
this was done.


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               21

               HOW THE CROSS COURTED THE SWASTIKA

     The arrests and trial's were, in the first place, almost
entirely in the Catholic provinces where these communities are most
numerous and, as it proved, most vicious; as the small communities
in Protestant provinces are as critically watched as in America and
Britain. All the police-officials charged with the preliminary
inquiries and the arrests were Catholics and the courts
predominantly Catholic. Every witness against the monks was a
Catholic, and nearly every one of the accused pleaded guilty,
blaming the morbid conditions of the life and the drunkenness that
was permitted. The trials were held, in the normal form, in the
high courts of the capitals of these Catholic provinces (mostly
Cologne, Bonn, Coblentz, and Munich) and were reported daily in the
chief papers of the provinces, which have three Catholic reader's
to one non-Catholic; and these papers fully sustained the verdicts
and admitted the guilt.

     Are these just Nazi allegations? Not at all. During 1936 and
1937 I followed the trials in these papers -- effectively, Catholic
papers -- chiefly the Koinische Zeitung and the Westfalische Kurier
checked by Berlin and Munich papers, and got the details from them.
They even sometimes rapped their own prelates on the knuckle's for
trying to gloss over or deny the ugly facts. I read fairly lengthy
reports of scores of individual trials of monks, priests (sometimes
of high rank), and even a nun (for seducing boy-pupils). Nine out
of ten of the monks were convicted of sodomy, as were most of the
priests, though some were charged with indecent relations with
young girls (down to 12 or 13) and were proved by their
parishioners to have done this over a period of many years.

     The charge was generally sodomy, and this, as I said, fully
explains why there were, comparatively, so few priests. Fornication
is not an offence in law, and so the priests do not as a rule come
under the notice of the police. There were a few arrests of zealous
priests for attacking the government (over the Concordat) in
sermons and many prosecution for smuggling currency out of Germany.
The police found that the Church used demure looking nuns and
venerable friars, their holy costumes stuffed with notes, to make
a profit in the sternly forbidden exchange-transactions or to
smuggle money to Rome. But in the overwhelming majority of cases
the charge was sodomy, and the next most frequent charge the
corruption of young girls. The World Almanac for 1939 says (p.
236):

     "Up to October, 1938, more than 8,000 Catholic monks and lay
brothers had been arrested by Nazi officials, approximately 50
percent of the 16,000 members of German monasteries, on various
charges, including immorality, sedition, breaches of exchange laws,
abuse of the pulpit, collecting fund's without government
permission, or failure to fly the Swastika flag on national
monuments. Forty-five monks, 176 lay-brothers, and 21 monastery
employees were sentenced on immorality charges: 188 priests were
acquitted or released without trial."

     It is pleasant to find that an American publication had the
courage to print so much -- no British publication had, and I
failed to get a publisher for a book -- but the details are
misleading. "Arrested by Nazi officials" does not mean the Gestapo,


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               22

               HOW THE CROSS COURTED THE SWASTIKA

but, generally, Catholic policemen and officers. The list of
charges is misleading because sodomy far outnumbered the others;
and the last sentence is particularly unfortunate. Over the period
of nearly two years in which I followed the trials 90 percent were
for vice, and very few of the accused escaped, and then only in
virtue of an earlier amnesty. Many of these were priest-monks,
though of the 400 Franciscan monks of the Westphalian province, who
were the first to be arraigned, 61 (mostly the directing priests
and superiors) got secret warning and fled the country (many to
Rome), which left a disproportion of priests to monks in the 276
who were arrested. The province was found to be wholly corrupt and
the Pope abolished it after a few trials. The non-monastic priests
who were arrested were scattered over Germany and only casually
mentioned in the press, but of the cases I collected nine-tenths
again were for vice (boys and little girls), hardly one in ten was
acquitted. Later there were more numerous arrests for "sedition" or
criticism of the "persecution of the Church".



                            Chapter V


               THE POPE CONTINUES TO COURT HITLER


     Hitler is a rotten speaker: raucous in voice, graceless in
gesture, and loose in the composition of his speeches. It is not
"personal magnetism" that makes him a power with the young -- the
older are mostly driven to his gatherings -- but a belief in his
genius that is artificially created by years of the most elaborate
and most persistent boosting. The most effective speech he ever
made was on January 1, 1939, when he replied to the Vatican and
world-complaint that he persecuted the Church. There was, of
course, a fallacy in his argument. Unquestionably he wanted to
change the Catholic Church in Germany in a sense which the Vatican
could not possibly accept and of this he said nothing, but his
direct reply to the charge of persecution of religion was
effective.

     The German government has always subsidized the Churches but
Hitler had more than trebled the subsidy. Between 1933, when he
took office, and 1938 it rose from 1,50,000,000 Marks to
500,000,0,00 a year. What was your subsidy to the Churches, he
asked of France, Britain, an America? He had never closed a church,
and he left the Roman Church the richest land-owner in south and
west Germany. It drew 1,500,000,000 Marks a year from its property
alone. (German papers give its wealth as $20,000,000,000). All that
he asked was that priests should behave themselves as respectably
as other citizens. "Paederasty and the corruption of children," he
said, "are punished by law like other crimes in this state." The
roars of applause in this case expressed the sentiment of
practically the whole of Germany.

     And the Black International knew it. In foreign countries they
dare not stake their case on the question whether the vice-trials
were or were not genuine. An impartial press-inquiry would soon 
settle that. They preferred to use their censorship of the press to

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               23

               HOW THE CROSS COURTED THE SWASTIKA

prevent any mention of them or to confuse the public with a vague
charge of persecution and talk about smuggling currency and
criticizing the Nazis. I cannot speak for the American press but as
far as I could ascertain no British paper even mentioned the
Sensational trials that were spread over 1936 to 1938 and then
extended to Austria. Was there ever such self-denial on the part of
newspaper men? You know why.

     At the Vatican and in Germany this was clearly recognized. The
trials had begun at the end of May (1936). After ten trials the
Pope suppressed the Westphalian province of the Franciscan Order,
its largest and richest province, for irregularity: a step without
precedent in modern times and so grave that only a desperate hope
of disarming Hitler can have prompted it. But the trials went on
until the influx of foreigners for the Olympic Games made it
advisable to suspend them. Some of these foreigners might be able
to read German and learn how monks of pure Aryan blood talked
indecency to children under ten on the steps of their houses, raped
helpless youths in their hospitals . . . In the period of
suspension, with 260 friars still in prison awaiting trial, the
bishops, who probably knew how far the search for culprits would
reach -- for evidence had been given in court that youths had
reported the matter to ecclesiastical authorities and been silenced
-- approached Hitler. The British press reported in August that
they had conferred with Hitler on the "currency-charges" against
priests and monks. There were then few currency-charges but
hundreds of vice-charges, so we know what they wanted; especially
as there was nothing to protest against in the fines for smuggling
currency.

     Next month the bishops, now clearly under Pacelli's orders,
made a fresh attempt. On September 12, 1936, the Nazionale Zeitung
published a copy of a letter from the bishops to the faithful which
was to be read in all the Catholic Churches of Germany next day. It
trusted that Hitler would bury the past and admit Catholics to
cooperate with him in the fight against the ever-increasing threat
of world-Bolshevism which shows its sinister hand in Spain, Russia
and Mexico. As they added that "guns are not enough to fight the
Bolshevik danger -- a sound lead is necessary to secure victory,"
they very clearly wanted Hitler to crush Bolshevism in Russia by
war and so consecrated his program of aggression. And as these
words of theirs are an echo of words that the Pope had used a few
weeks earlier it is obvious that Pacelli was the author. He had at
last, in the summer of 1936, matured his program and found his
slogan: the extinction of Bolshevism in Russia, Spain, and Mexico.
Sometimes to give respectability to his Japanese alliance, he added
-- China. As I have earlier said, the A.F.L. defeated his plan to
get America to attack Mexico, but it remains true that he wanted
the war. The rest of his slogan stands. He was pledged to support
the plans of aggressive war of Germany, Italy, and Japan, the
foulest nations on earth.

     Hitler ignored the bishops, but Pacelli still pressed. On
November 4 the Times reported that Mussolini was pressing Hitler to
come to terms with the Vatican, as this would not only give him
more weight in the "clerical state" which Franco was to set up in
Spain but would help him in his designs on Austria: a hint at the 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               24

               HOW THE CROSS COURTED THE SWASTIKA

part the Church would play when the time came to annex that
country. Mussolini was at this time a practicing Catholic once
more. Also he had begun, with the enthusiastic support of the Black
International his brutal campaign in Abyssinia and his hypocritical
action in Spain.

     A week later (Times, November 13, 1936) Hitler had a request
for an interview from Cardinal Faulhaber. He received him
grudgingly and more or less secretly, and when the Cardinal put
before him the request of the bishops and asked in return for the
control of Catholic education by the Church, the Minister of
Education, whom, Hitler had invited to be present, advised him to
refuse. The Churches were, he insisted, negligible allies, as they
had lost their power over men's minds in many part of the world."
The offer of the Church was refused, and the destruction of
Catholic schools, as new vice-trials of the religious teachers gave
a pretext, and associations continued.

     Nevertheless the Vatican remained on such terms with Germany
that when, in March, 1937, there was a mild rebuke of breaches of
the Concordat in a new encyclical and Mundelein continued his
violent campaign in America, the German government sent a complaint
to Rome. Catholics boasted that the Vatican refused to listen, but
there was no breach. Indeed, a month later Count Preysing, the
aristocratic Catholic bishop of Berlin, addressed another appeal to
Hitler (Times, July 3, 1937). It is in this that we get the
admission of monastic corruption. It said that the bishop's "do not
deny that in certain orders of lay brothers many members had been
drawn into a sphere of serious moral perversities." Perhaps one
could not expect a more strongly worded admission from such a
source, but the shifting of responsibility from the priests to the
lay brothers is very misleading. These lay brothers of the
Franciscan Order, of whom nearly 300 in one province were arrested
for sodomy, were under the direct authority of the clerical heads
of the Order, were periodically examined by representatives of
those authorities and were in each monastery ruled by a number of
priest-monks. Evidence was given by the brothers in the trials that
the epidemic of vice had been reported to the authorities in these
periodical examinations which are (of the most intimate character)
and no notice had been taken.

     There was no modification of the Nazi policy. In December the
Pope feebly complained to his cardinals, when they came to him with
their Christmas greetings, of the persecution in Germany. The
excuse was, he said, that the Church interfered in polities. Even
the cardinals must have smiled when the aged and not very clear-
headed Pope went on to say that "no fair-minded man" could Say that
the Church ever interfered in politics. A few month's earlier he
had summoned the powers to crush by war the kind of government
which the people of Spain and Mexico had freely chosen and
supported at every election: the form of government which, whatever
its beginning, had won the support of the entire Russian people, as
all the world now realizes. At that very moment the Vatican was
working with its murderous allies to change the political form of
Spain, had mercilessly intervened in polities in Austria for years,
had given, its blessing to the enslavement of the Abyssinian
people, and had helped to establish Fascism in South America.


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               25

               HOW THE CROSS COURTED THE SWASTIKA

     One might have expected that in these circumstances the Papacy
would assert what was left of its moral dignity and abandon the
dishonoring opportunism that had characterized its relations with
the brutal Nazis since 1932. On the pretty theory of the Papacy
which is put before the world its duty was to denounce the crimes
of Nazi Germany and the menace to the world of its naked ambition
and let German Catholics take such punishment from the criminals as
Catholics are supposed to endure with heroism rather than bow the
knee to iniquity.

     It may be objected that at the most we can accuse Pacelli, who
was entirely responsible for the policy of the senile Pontiff, of
an error of judgment in a grave dilemma. That would be a
misrepresentation of the position. He clung to his German, Italian,
and Japanese allies, not singly to avert persecution from Catholics
in their dominions -- and we must remember that even in this the
real concern of the Black International is the loss of members
under the strain -- but because his policy coincided with theirs.
When the time comes for China to recover its territory, as it
surely must come if the poison is to be got out of the veins of the
world, Roman Catholic influence in the Far East will be very justly
restricted. The Vatican has irretrievably pledged itself to the
Japanese bully. in Italy it is not less firmly pledged to the
support of Mussolini. What Cardinal Hinsley said, that if Mussolini
falls the "cause of God" - of the Black International -- falls,
remains true. Socialism would get control of Italy, and the time
has gone by for triumphant democrats to handle with kid gloves the
reactionary elements that have shed blood whenever they temporarily
recovered power; besides that Fascist Italy is indispensable to the
Pope's fantastic plan of a great bloc of Fascist-Catholic powers to
offset the influence of the democracies, or their rich Catholic
minorities, in the Church.

     And beyond all this is the Church's indispensable need of a
Fascist atmosphere in any state in which it is to flourish. As I
have shown, the apparent progress of the Church in such democracies
as America and Britain is a fallacy. Not only does it lose instead
of advancing if the birth rate is taken into account, but migration
from backward Catholic countries is the adequate explanation of the
apparent progress. In France, where there has been no such
immigration on a large scale, the membership of the Church fell in
30 years from 30,000,000 to about 5,000,000 when (in 1871) the
country became a democracy; and it was the same in Italy and Spain
as long as they were democracies. There is not a single exception
to the law that free discussion is fatal to the Roman system. Its
effect is merely modified in America and Britain by the conspiracy
of the Black International to intimidate editors, publishers,
booksellers, librarians, etc., and the drastic law that. Catholics
shall not read critics of the Church.

     Hence in Germany a policy that is purely ecclesiastical and
takes no account of moral and social considerations has to cling at
all cost and in spite of all rebuffs to the hope of disarming the
hostility of the Nazis and helping to maintain them in power. Both
the rebuffs and the policy of appeasement continued. On October 15,
1938, the Volkischer Beobachter, a recognized Nazi organ, said: "We
are armed to continue the battle against Catholicism to the point 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               26

               HOW THE CROSS COURTED THE SWASTIKA

of total annihilation." Vice-prosecutions multiplied, and the Nazis
called for, and would presently obtain, the suppression of all
Catholic schools in Bavaria. And remember that while Catholic
influence in America could, by getting the essential facts
concealed from the American public, represent this as a piece of
wanton persecution of religion, every German knew that it was done
on the ground judicially established in hundreds of cases, that the
most respecter Catholic teachers, the brothers who were vowed to
chastity and asceticism, were corrupt and corruptors. The
philanthropic institutions-schools, orphanages, infirmaries, etc.,
of which the Church had been so proud were taken over by the
authorities and entrusted to laymen.

     I am in this booklet confining myself to Germany so that the
reader may get a clear view of the strange situation in that
country insofar as it concerns the Church. It must, however be
understood that the humiliation of the proud Church in 1938 was far
greater than we realize if we restrict our attention to Germany. In
Spain the Vatican and the Nazis were actually cooperating in that
holy war for the extinction of Bolshevism, which was now Pacelli's
ruling passion. In Austria and Czecho-Slovakia the Black
International rendered even more useful service than cooperation.
It prepared the way for those bloodies's triumphs of the Nazis
which history will record to the deep shame of the western
democracies; the triumphs of lying by which Hitler preserved his
armies for the attack on France, Britain, and Russia and gradually
pressed all the rest of Europe into the position of bleeding slaves
in his war-galley. How the Vatican helped him to do this, and how
Pacelli became Pope in 1939 and contemplated the ghastly
consequences of his policy yet persisted in it while the whole
civilized and free world was filled with moral indignation will be
told in a later book.



                          ****     ****

    Reproducible Electronic Publishing can defeat censorship.


   The Bank of Wisdom is a collection of the most thoughtful,
scholarly and factual books. These computer books are reprints of
suppressed books and will cover American and world history; the
Biographies and writings of famous persons, and especially of our
nations Founding Fathers. They will include philosophy and
religion. all these subjects, and more, will be made available to
the public in electronic form, easily copied and distributed, so
that America can again become what its Founders intended --

                 The Free Market-Place of Ideas.

   The Bank of Wisdom is always looking for more of these old,
hidden, suppressed and forgotten books that contain needed facts
and information for today. If you have such books please contact
us, we need to give them back to America.

                          ****     ****


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               27


                        28 page printout

    Reproducible Electronic Publishing can defeat censorship.

          This file, its printout, or copies of either
          are to be copied and given away, but NOT sold.

          Bank of Wisdom, Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                          ****     ****

THE BLACK INTERNATIONAL          No. 4

              THE VATICAN BURIES INTERNATIONAL LAW

              HOW MUSSOLINI AND THE YELLOW BROTHER
                         GOT THEIR SHARE

                        by Joseph McCabe

                   HALDEMAN-JULIUS PUBLICATION
                     GIRARD  -- : --  KANSAS

                          ****     ****

                            CONTENTS

  CHAPTERS

     I    The Church's Record In Spain .................... 5

    II    Enter First and Second Murders
               Under the Papal Banner ..................... 11
   III    Spain and the Catholic League ................... 16

    IV    Papal Cowardice in Abyssinia -- And Why ......... 22

     V    The Jap Gets a Gold Medal for His
               'Chinese Incident' ......................... 28

                          ****     ****

                                I

                THE CHURCH'S VILE RECORD IN SPAIN

     Some years ago I strolled on a summer day through the drowsy
streets of Toledo, an ancient city in the center of Spain. A
thousand years ago it was one of the richest and most populous
cities in Europe. More than a quarter of a million vivid,
prosperous, bright-eyed folk had filled its narrow streets and
bought luxuries from every part of the world in its teeming stores.
Such was the fame of its craftsmen that the "Toledo Blade" was
sought from end to end in Europe and is still famous in literature.
How high Spain would have risen if men had continued to build on
that superb foundation of that old Moorish civilization! But in
1923 I found only 30,000 folk, mostly poor and illiterate, living
within the ancient walls; and I smiled sadly, when, as I passed
along the almost deserted streets, a boy offered to show me where
his ancestors had hanged "those wicked devils the Moors." It is
worse today.


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               1

              THE VATICAN BURIES INTERNATIONAL LAW

     It was the history of Spain and its Church in a phrase, Spain
inherited all the stupendous wealth and science of the Arab 
civilization, one city of which could have bought up, ten times
over, all the cities of Christian Europe, and to this it had added
all the wealth it had acquired by the discovery of America. It was
literally choking with wealth by the middle of the sixteenth
century. And little more than a hundred years later it was the
poorest, most despised country in the world. About 5,000,000 folk,
most of them ragged and unkempt, eked out a poor living on soil
that had given rich sustenance to 30,000,000 Arabs and their
contented subjects. For this awful downfall, one of the saddest in
history, and for all the later disasters that fell upon one of the
most attractive peoples in Europe, the Black International is
supremely responsible.

     By the beginning of the twentieth century Spain had raised its
proud head once more amongst the nations. It had a fine literature
and a rising prosperity. The cities that had shrunk within the
shell of ancient walls were bursting through these in the
exuberance of the life. The people smiled again, like the roses of
Seville in spring. They had for 80 years fought the strangle-hold
of the Church and had loosened if not broken it. A distinguished
literary traveller, Thirlmere, went intimately amongst the people
and wrote this verdict: "The Church knows that she is doomed in
Spain" (Letters from Catalonia, 1905, p. 437). Mr. Thirlmere ought
to have been more cautious. He ought to have added: "Unless she can
return to her old policy of violence and torture." She has
recovered it. Today Spain is back in the ragged Middle Ages, its
people begging food of other nations -- in a land which, with the
crude plows and other implements of a thousand years ago, had
richly nourished 30,000,000 folk and borne princely cities -- their
minds darkened, their hearts broken. And it is the work of the
Black International: of the bishops, priests, monks, and nuns, who
have returned to their old sleekness while the people have returned
to their poverty

     In an earlier work I referred to certain evidence of
government by violence, indeed brutal violence, in Spain today. It
may not have appeared in the American press, owing to the Catholic
censorship, and it is material to compare it with the suave
professions of Catholic apologists and the beautiful words they
quote from Papal encyclicals. It is a simple account of the
experiences of a French girl, apparently a Catholic, of nineteen
who escaped from the purgatory of Vichy France into what she calls
the "hell" of Franco Span. It was published (as it makes no
reference to the Church) in the British News-Chronicle, a paper
that is very sensitive to Catholic influence, on September 24
(1941).

     Mlle. X was arrested soon after she crossed the frontier and
was put in jail at Badajoz. She was lodged in a large room with
about 250 women, "an appalling mixture": prostitutes, thieves, so-
called Communists, etc. "Most of the prisoners were in rags,
filthy, and covered with vermin." There were no mattresses or
blankets for the night. After two days she was brought before the
Governor of Badajoz and, without trial or inquiry, sentenced to an
indefinite term of imprisonment. She claimed that she was of
British nationality, and a few days later, she was taken before the

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               2

              THE VATICAN BURIES INTERNATIONAL LAW

prison director: a "brute", she says, who bullied her for two
hours, told her she was "a dirty little liar" and sent her "back to
hell." Every evening all the prisoners were assembled in the
courtyard and compelled to sing the Falangist anthem and at the
close cry lustily: "Long live Spain. Up with Free Spain. Franco,
Franco, Franco." The jailers lashed with whips any woman who did
not join heartily in the chorus. The girl endured several weeks of
this and she was then taken before a British Consul to prove her
claim of nationality. She was removed to a jail at Seville, which
was "worse than Badajoz" (which she describes as hell), removed
back to Badajoz, and removed to Madrid, where she bad a solitary
dark and freezingly cold cell; and all the time officers "tried to
be as cruel as they could to me", jeering at her as a Communist spy
and assuring her she would never leave Spain. These Spanish
gentlemen had her before them standing for two to three hours every
morning. A girl in the next cell one day cried, "Live, live,
Liberty, Long live England". She was taken out and beaten, and
presently there were shots in the courtyard. every day such shots
were heard. One less of those who refused to bow to the Church.

     I gather that this girl was not British, but the British
authorities humanely lied, and admitted her claim of nationality,
and rescued her. But think of the thousands of women and girls, and
the tens of thousands of youths and men, suffering this living hell
in the jails of Badajoz and Seville and Madrid and a hundred
others, after fighting heroically for three years in the cause of
freedom. And the Catholic press assures you, the Vatican Assures
all the world, and far too much of the world-press repeats the
assurance or refuses to disturb it, that Spain has now resumed its
beautiful, happy life in the arms of Mother Church; and won't you
please contribute for the alleviation of the misery which the
wicked Reds had brought upon the country. So it was in the
beginning -- or nearly 500 years ago, when the Church recovered
power -- is now, and never again shall be. Do you really wonder if
in the heat of the hundredth struggle against the Church in 1936-
1938 some of the men who knew the long record of brutality and knew
how the priests were using the callous and ambitious Franco to
recover their mastery of the jails, shot a few of them and trampled
on their 'sacred' vestments and other paraphernalia of their trade?

     It is nearly forty years since I began writing on Spain and
its Church, and the truth which I told was not a collection of
obscure and disputed facts resting upon the testimony of Radicals
and Reds. My first scalding indictment of the Church and the
cleric-controlled state (The Martyrdom of Ferrer, 1909) was fully
endorsed and whole pages of it translated in the following year by
one of the most distinguished scholars of Madrid University,
Professor Simarro, in his voluminous study of the trial (El Proceso
Ferrer). What I claimed for the Arab civilization (The Splendor of
Moorish Spain 1935) is based upon the works of half a dozen Spanish
professors who are masters of Arabic and is no more than S.P. Scott
claims in America in his 'Moorish Empire in Spain.' And the
appalling story I gave of the struggle with the Church since 1814
is fully and truly told in such standard and conservative works as
the Cambridge Modern History (Vol. XI) and Major M. Hume's 'Modem
Spain' (in the Story of Nations series). Yet every time the long
blood-soaked struggle is renewed in Spain the public is puzzled and
is ready to admit every Catholic lie about the innocent Church and
its "satanic" enemies. I must repeat a few points.
                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               3

              THE VATICAN BURIES INTERNATIONAL LAW

     On the broad map of our chaotic world Spain seems to be of
limited importance. In the fevered and crowded chronicle of events
during the last five years its recent Civil War and the conquest of
it by that unholy alliance of Catholic armies and Nazi-Fascist
butchers seems to be just the third step -- after the disarming of
Austria and the rape of Abyssinia -- in the preparation of the
stage for the Nazi aggression. But in a study of the share of the
Black International in the world-tragedy it is supremely important;
and it is to Spain, with which it hopes to link Spanish America
once more, that the Vatican chiefly looks for the destruction of
our modern liberty and enlightenment by a bloc of Catholic powers.

     As far as the last century is concerned it is not necessary
here to do more than repeat in a more definite form what I said in
the first book of this series: that in Spain, as in Portugal and
Italy. "Reds" have always been the clergy and their allies. The
revolution which put Franco in power in 1938 is the tenth major
revolution that has occurred in Spain since the days of Napoleon.
In six of these the people wrested power, in five cases out of six
without war, from the clerical-royalists. Every member of the
Bourdon dynasty of Spanish monarchs except Alfonso XII, who died
prematurely, has been ignominiously driven from Spain for his or
her crimes and vices at one time or other. In four counter-
revolutions the clerical-royalists recovered power, either by force
or by perjury or a mixture of the two. These four counter-
revolutions, in which the Church was as busy as the state, were
followed by official reprisals of so brutal a character that
between 50,000 and 100,000 unarmed Spaniards were executed or
killed in jail and many hundreds of thousands suffered agonies. The
six popular revolutions were, nevertheless, never followed by
official reprisals, and the spontaneous local outbreaks in which
the exploited workers burned churches and killed a few priests and
monks were checked by the authorities.

     All that may be read in Hume's standard history of the
Cambridge Modern History, I have told the relevant facts in my
'Revolt in Spain' (1931) and given a condensed account in the
'Appeal to Reason' Library (No. 1). There is just one point of this
past history which I would recall, as Catholic writers are now apt
to say that all this butchery was perpetrated by the state, and
even that the clergy tried to check it. Major Hume, the highest
recent authority on Spain, describing the counter-revolution of
1822, says (Modern Spain, p. 256):

          Modern civilization has seen no such instance of brutal,
     blind ferocity as that which followed the arrival of Ferdinand
     at Madrid. There was neither justice nor mercy in the
     government of the besotted churchmen who surrounded the King.
     The gallows was the sole instrument and argument by which they
     ruled . . . The frenzy of intolerance and cruelty spread from
     the preaching friars and ignorant nobles to the brutal mob. .
     . . It is a lamentable truth that much of the atrocities of
     this persecution was owing to the influence of the friars and
     the Church. A hideous ecclesiastical society, founded by the
     Bishop of Osuna and called "The Exterminating Angel", which
     spread its ramifications. all over Spain organized vengeance
     upon Liberals; every pulpit, every monastery, every royalist
     club, was a center of persecution.

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               4

              THE VATICAN BURIES INTERNATIONAL LAW

     That Hume was no friend of radicalism is shown in his remark
that they surpassed "even the most bloodthirsty wretches of the
French Reign of Terror", and he has to confess that the man who
"surpassed all previous efforts, even in this blood-thirsty reign"
was the very pious and priest-ridden Count de Espana.

     It is enough that these horrors were perpetrated by an
intimate alliance of the clergy and the servants of a King,
Ferdinand VII who in his depravity is compared by historians to
Nero; and about the same time even worse butchery was being
perpetrated in South Italy by the same alliance of the clergy with
his namesake and rival in vice, Ferdinand of Naples. Both Kings had
recovered power by a most solemn oath on the Bible during Mass to
observe the Constitution -- Ferdinand of Naples had asked God to
strike him dead if he was not sincere -- and both were absolved
from their oaths the bishops and the Jesuits and encouraged to
wallow in blood. Eighty years later Alfonso XIII stood at the
perjured altar amidst the crowd of bishops and took this solemn
oath: "I swear before God and his holy gospels to maintain the
Constitution". And the priests were silent when the old fortress of
Monjuich again resounded with the cries of tortured men and the
reports of rifles: when Alfonso, to check the threatened revelation
of his theft of millions of dollars -- see Alfonso XIII Unmasked,
by the greatest Spanish writer of the time, Blasco Ibanez -- tore
up the Constitution and set up the dictatorship of the brutal and
dissipated General de Rivers. Spaniards know these things. After
the revolution of 1931 a splendid system of education was created,
and freedom of discussion carried the truth into villages and
workshops. Did some soldier, worker here and there, knowing these
things and seeing the priests conspiring with the perjured Franco
and the butchers of Germany, lose his temper and run his bayonet
through one or two of them? I should not be surprised. But remember
that at present we have only Catholic statement's about Red
outrages in the Civil War.

     We know what Catholic literature is, but we have also here a
close parallel to guide us. The world-press was inundated with
similar Catholic stories of Red outrages after the Socialist-
Communist revolt of 1934. Fortunately, Spain had not yet passed
completely under the control of the Black International, and,
though some investigators like, Lord Listowel and Ellen Wilkinson,
were obstructed at every turn and soon politely conducted to the
frontier, others got through; and there were weighty and
unassailable Spanish investigations to which I will return later.
Here let me just quote an incident from Leah Manning's What I Saw
in Spain (1934).

     The mother-superioress of a convent was pressed to testify
that her nuns had been raped by the Red's. As it was false, she
refused. I gather, in fact, that the only outrage committed was to
the delicate ears of the nuns, as the insurgent miners who had
taken over the convent as a hospital were not very refined in their
talk to each other. Probably many of the nuns were disappointed. A
Catholic will reflect that here at least I confess to the honesty
of a nun. As not always admitted that there are some good men
amongst the priests and plenty of good nuns the world over! The
more important question that any impartial reader will ask himself 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               5

              THE VATICAN BURIES INTERNATIONAL LAW

is whether this particular superioress, out of hundreds, is likely
to have been the only one to be pressed by the priests and Catholic
journalists to make a charge of outrages and reminded that the good
of the Church is paramount.

     These stories remind us of that historian of the Russian
Revolution. L. Lawton, much quoted by Catholics, who tells how in
the Civil War of 1919-1921 the sadistic Bolsheviks slaughtered 1275
archbishops and bishops, when even the Catholic Encyclopedia
confesses that there were only about 80 in the entire country. But
we will return later to these things. Let me lead up briefly to the
immediate causes of the Civil War in Spain.

     In view of its disreputable record the Bourbon dynasty was
irretrievably lost in Spain when, in 1931, Alfonso was compelled to
abdicate and fled for the frontier. For two years after that date
the opposition to the Republican government came overwhelmingly
from the Church. Municipal election's in Spain gave a little more
freedom of expression than general elections, which have been very
corrupt ever since the Conservative-Liberal alternation of crops
began to flourish in the parliamentary field. It was a striking
victory of the republicans and anti-clericals at the municipal
elections of 1931 that caused Alfonso, after a fruitless attempt to
get the army to fight for him, to tuck his tail between his legs
and run. The urban or educated Spaniard's had voted against, him by
three to one, and it was only in the cities that voting was free
and the counting of votes honest. Even in a pro-Catholic history
like Professor E.A. Peers's 'Spanish Tragedy' (1936) we find it
admitted that there, was "gerrymandering in the country districts
on a large scale." It used to be of the pleasantries of Spanish
political life -- it is this kind of thing that gives the country
so many anarchists -- to work out the results of elections some
days before the election.

     Two points about these events of ten years ago must for the
stressed for the purpose of this inquiry. The first is that during
four weeks after the popular triumph there were not even isolated
outrages. I was not then in Spain but I verified this in the
'Times,' day by day and that paper was on the alert for Red
outrages. The people knew the whole ghastly 'story of the alliance
of Church and corrupt monarchy which I have outlined and they had
just escaped from a seven years' brutal dictatorship which had been
in the closest association with the Church. Yet it was not until
the twenty-eighth day after the election that the burning of
churches and convents began.

     The second point explains why groups of young workers here and
there, dodging the police (who made every effort to check them),
then began to burn convents and churches; a very shocking thing, of
course, but compare it to the official Catholic reprisals of
earlier years which I described. In the Spanish illustrated papers
I saw photographs of the young incendiaries politely conducting
nuns and aged priests away from the burning buildings. Well, the
fact was that Cardinal Segura, head of the Spanish Church,
supported by his three leading archbishops, had issued a most
vituperate attack on the new government and summoned the country to
resist. He started the myth which, ridiculous as it was, the 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               6

              THE VATICAN BURIES INTERNATIONAL LAW

Catholic press has repeated ever since, that in some mysterious way
a small minority of what he called "enemies of the Kingdom of Jesus
Christ" had won a majority at the election (when, under Catholic
about 12,000,000 votes were cast). This is still written in spite
of the fact that the election had been one of the cleanest that
Span had ever had; that in the cities, where there was little or no
corruption, the voting was three to one against the Church (Madrid
90,000 to 30,000; Barcelona, 90,000 to 28,000, and so on) and that
the Church won only in the smaller town's and villages where
"gerrymandering on a large scale" is admitted by admirers of the
Church.

     Segura was driven from Spain by the national flame of
indignation, and he went to talk matters over with Pacelli-Pius at
Rome. The Spanish clergy remained free to agitate for the impending
general election, which was to ratify the verdict of the municipal
election; the establishment of a republic and the disestablishment
of the Church. The result of the general election showed that there
had been no snap-vote and no intrigue of a minority. The anti-
clericals -- Liberals, Radicals, and Socialists -- won 315 seats,
the clerical-royalists 121.

     The new government entered peacefully upon the work of framing
a Constitution. The Church was to be disestablished and the annual
subsidy to it abandoned; the Jesuits were to be expelled and monks
driven out of trade; divorce was to be instituted and secular
marriage recognized; 27,000 new schools were to be built. The worst
sting was the confiscation of the wealth of the Jesuits and some of
the orders. A Catholic prelate who (like so many priests) detested
the Jesuits and the monks, Msgr. Jose Veleda de Gunjado, had shown
that the monks and nuns had in their hands two-thirds of the money
and one-third of the real estate of Spain, yet the state had been
paying the Church annually more than it spent on education. The
elections proved that, as Azana said, Spain "had ceased to be a
Catholic country", and this state of things was intolerable. Month
by month the clauses of the new Constitution were carried by five
to one in the Cortes. The country was quiet, except for the shrieks
of the clergy and their dupes. The progress in education attracted
pedagogists from many lands, the prosperity of the country began to
rise, a fair progress was made with schemes of social betterment.
This in all sober history, is the regime of savagery, of
persecution of the majority by a small vicious minority, about
which you read in Catholic literature.

                               II

               ENTER FIRST AND SECOND MURDERERS --
                     UNDER THE PAPAL BANNER

     I have now fully vindicated what I claimed in the first book;
that the Black International, instead of having disowned the
violent and bloody policy of earlier years, still pursued it in the
one country, apart from Poland, where it was able to do so. I was
in the Canaries, returning from Australia, just after the Church
and King had set up the brutal General de Rivera as dictator in
1923, and men showed me where the pavement had been reddened with
the blood of anti-clericals. I was in Spain next year and saw the 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               7

              THE VATICAN BURIES INTERNATIONAL LAW

country cowering under the Dictator and the clergy smiling and
richer than ever. This continued until 1931; and we saw that the
anti-clericals in spite of the red record of the Church clung to
their tradition of humanity in their triumph.

     This makes it all the more necessary to inquire closely how
the country fell back into the clutches of the Black International.
You know the theory of the Catholic press; in fact, at the time the
theory of almost the whole American press. The Catholic nation, it
said, was roused to a consciousness of its enslavement by a small
Red minority, and Hitler and Mussolini merely helped it to express
itself. This is made more comical sometimes by calling the wicked
minority "Communists". The Spanish Communists were so small a body
that they had only one representative in the 300 deputies of the
Left coalition in the Cortes! I may add that they had leaders of
high culture and character and often rendered humane service during
the war.

     If you want a common-sense view of the tragedy in a few words
consider first the composition of the anti-clerical coalition. Most
of the deputies returned to the Cortes were Liberals (145) and
Radicals or Radical-Socialists (56). It is one of the painful but
inevitable facts of the struggle of democracy since 1848 that
whenever such a coalition as this wins a victory it splits up as
soon as constructive work begins. Liberalism, which had to that
time a very fine record in Spain, was still very powerful in the
cities, but it now had to face, as allies, a larger body of
Socialists, Communists, Syndicalists, and Anarchists. These had
been brought up in a tradition of hatred of the middle-class, and
in any case a split on the proposal to pass even moderately
collectivist legislation was inevitable. And the more advanced
workers, full of the mischievous principle that the proletariat
needs no help from any other class, were by no means averse to
irritating the Liberals. Government became very unstable and was
often changed. The Liberals, we shall see, for the most part
deserted the coalition against the Church, and their leader,
Lerroux, a grand fighter (as friends of his told me) in the
nineteenth century, but now a weakling, is strongly suspected of
accepting Catholic bribes.

     Further, the radical rump was composed of four mutually
antagonistic parties. The Anarchists, whose main principle was that
central government s always corrupt -- it always had been in Spain
-- and the Syndicalists, who wanted the chief functions of state
transferred to the unions (syndicates), would not vote at
parliamentary elections until it was too late. In 1934 a Socialist
government (or largely Socialist) had to crush a revolt got up by
these elements and the Communists. We shall see what happened, but,
while the existence of these masses of Anarchists and syndicalists
who did not vote makes the anti-clerical majority in 1931 even
larger than the election-returns make it, they were an element of
great danger until they agreed to form a Frente Popular (Popular
Front). It was then too late.

     A third point is of almost equal importance. With that noble
un-wisdom into which enthusiasts have so often driven advanced
governments the Socialists prematurely granted female suffrage. Not
only were there in Spain 500,000 more women than men but Spanish 

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               8

              THE VATICAN BURIES INTERNATIONAL LAW

Liberals had, for selfish reasons, made the same blunder as the
French and resisted the modern movement for the emancipation of
women. They left them to the priests; and the priests raised their
neurotic mixture of thwarted sex and religion to fever heat in 1934
and 1935. There must have been smiles in Pacelli's gilded chambers
when the "Bolsheviks" enfranchised the women. Woman's place is the
home, except when her vote is of value the Church.

     Meantime the Catholics got a leader, Gil Robles, of just the
type that was fitted to take advantage of such a situation. Imagine
Hearst and a Jesuit rolled into one. The Church was then organizing
Catholic Action everywhere, or getting its lay members to do work
(intrigue, journalism, bribery, intimidation. etc.) which the
public might not allow the priests to do. Robles, Jesuit-trained,
robust and unscrupulous, was a newspaper-owner, and he introduced
a new strident note into Catholic papers. With funds supplied by
the Catholic millionaire, Juan March, and the Church, he began to
organize "Catholic Youth"; with a leaven of the sort of scum that
Mussolini had attracted in Italy and Hitler in Germany. People
began to hear of Falangists, which is much the same as Fascists, or
Soldiers. The prospect, of a fight gives pep to any creed.

     In 1933 the Constitution was passed, and the government
appealed to the country; and a wave of enthusiasm swept over the
Catholic world when it was announced that the Right had won 207
seats, the Left only 99 (including one Communist), and the wobbling
Center (Liberals) 167. It was not explained that the Right now
included 150 Agrarians sent by peasants amongst whom the late
government had promised to divide the confiscated religious
property and had been too slow about it, or that women now had the
vote. Robles knew that there had been no change of heart, and he
worked harder and more unscrupulously than ever. He drew Carlists
and royalists into his camp and encouraged the kind of rowdyism
that Mussolini had found attractive in Italy. He won Lerroux -- one
hopes that it was not by money -- and the Liberals split. Against
the agreement of Liberals and Socialists three Catholics were
planted in the cabinet, and the more radical workers began to
collect arms to meet a Liberal-Fascist coup. Lerroux became Premier
and declared the country in a state of war, and the workers of the
north raised the flag of revolt.

     It was the usual pathetic failure. Addressing a large meeting
organized by the Communists in London at the beginning of the Civil
War, I had to listen to one of the leading Communist speakers
predicting that the victory of democracy was certain, because she
had just heard that the government had served out rifles to the
workers. Rifles -- and to untrained men -- in an age of tanks,
planes, and big guns! When will such people cease to think about
the barricades of 1848 or even about the Russian revolution of 1918
with its unique conditions? The poor men made a heroic fight, but
Foreign Legionaries and Moors were brought over and the peasant-
regiments of the army on which the clergy could rely were used. The
chief result was to accelerate the withdrawal of Liberals and give
more color to the clerical cry of bloody Bolshevism.





                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               9

              THE VATICAN BURIES INTERNATIONAL LAW

     Still the Catholics were far from having won Spain. Robles
called for the execution of leaders of the revolt, and the 
government refused. Very promptly, as we shall see, Spaniards of
great authority and integrity had established that the stories of
Red outrages were fabrications and that real and disgusting
outrages had been committed by the Moorish troops, the Catholic
Civil Guards, and even by religious communities. But Robles got the
post of Minister of War, and Franco, Queips de Llano, and other
tools of the priests, were appointed to commanding positions in the
army.

     In view of the seriousness of the situation, all radical
parties, united in a Popular Front, and at the election of
February, 1935, they -- though it is evident that at least more
than a million Anarchists and syndicalists still refused to vote --
proved that the educated Spanish people remained, in spite of all
the scares, anti-clerical. Robles's Right coalition won 165 seats,
the Liberals -- those that remained republican and anti-clerical --
52, and the Left, 256. Azana, the able Radical-Socialist leader,
became Premier.

     This last free expression of the will of the Spanish people is
important because not only Catholic writers, but the press and
foreign statesmen, generally represented it as a victory for the
Right. This was done by a sophistical, indeed dishonest, quotation
of the votes cast instead of the seats won. British statesmen often
gave this as an excuse for their scandalous protection of the
intervention of the Germans and Italians. The vote's cast for
deputies of the Right were 4,750,000; for those of the Left,
4,536,000. But apart from the fact that women now voted -- and aged
nuns were carried to the polling station in litters -- and that the
Right coalition included Agrarians and Liberals who hated the
Church but dreaded Communism, we have not only to add the Liberal
vote (340,000) to the Left votes as far as the Church is concerned
but to take into account its immense number of Anarchists and
Syndicalists who still did not vote. It is enough to say that,
although no election was ever more fiercely contested, of a total
electorate of 12,548,000, less than 10,000,000 voted.

     Broadly speaking, in any case, it was a scare-election, like
that which put Hitler in power in Germany. There was no longer a
clear-cut issue on the question of supporting the Church. The
tremendous fall in the Liberal vote sufficiently shows this. It was
a popular slogan of Freethinkers of the last century and the early
years of this that the destruction of superstition is "the greatest
of all causes." But when the economic issue was raised it was
discovered -- in Spain, Portugal, Italy, France, and Spanish
America -- that the defense of the chance to make a fortune (which
not one in a thousand had any effective chance of making) was a
still greater cause. Let not the opponents of "the bloody
bourgeois" crow. In most countries they made a similar blunder in
abandoning the traditional Socialist fight against the Church. It
was, they said, converted; and it smiles today over spacious
cemeteries of their dead. Reform has to be won by concentrated
movements, but they must be united in an ideal that all reaction
must die.



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               10

              THE VATICAN BURIES INTERNATIONAL LAW

     These facts and reflections give the answer to the Catholic
cry, which was lamentably accepted in the world at large, during
the Civil War, that the Spanish people had repented of the hasty
enthusiasm of 1931 and 1932, or had discovered that it had been
duped, that the Franco-Mussolini-Hitler combine was a force of
liberation. The Spanish people did not vote on the same issues in
1931 and 1935, and they were in large part not the same votes.
There were the women, who had been left to the priests because this
was supposed to help to keep them chaste while their husbands had
mistresses's or frequented brothels, and there was a new generation
of voters of the age to which Robles and the priests particularly
appealed.

     But the chief fact to bear in mind is that the election-
figures themselves testify that the country was still in the
majority anti-Papal. The 4,750,000 votes cast for the Church
candidates, swollen by seared Liberals, disgruntled agrarians,
credulous dupes of outrage-stories, etc., were little more than
one-third of the electorate, or of the adult Spanish people. And,
like Hitler's push in 1932, it was a supreme effort. Other means
had to be sought, and the forces of the Right began at once to
organize them.

     The Catholic (and at that time general) theory is that, seeing
the tide flow against them, the Reds began to murder their
opponents and plunge the country in an anarchy from which it had to
be saved. We have just the same plea in the case of Italy and the
glorification of Mussolini as its savior, and Professor Salvemini
has patiently and thoroughly proved that it is a tissue of lies.
What exactly happened in Spain we do not know. The confusion of the
Civil War, which soon opened, prevented any dispassionate Study of
the events which had immediately preceded it, and we can no more be
asked to accept statements about those events which were made under
the Franco regime than we can be asked to pay serious attention to
Fascist legends about Mussolini's early struggle and his thousands
of Fascist martyrs.

     But so much is reliably known that even Professor Peers, the
pro-Catholic author of 'The Spanish Tragedy,' speaks of "an
epidemic of murder by gunmen, for at least some of which there was
an uncomfortably and rapidly growing suspicion that Fascism was
mainly responsible (p. 195). The phrase is inimitably professorial.
In the two chief incidents which were made the pretext for the
revolt the evidence is clear enough. A group of leading Socialists
coming out of a building in Madrid were shot down by gunmen. Can
there be a moment's serious doubt to which party the gunmen
belonged or by which they were hired? This led to the retaliatory
murder of a Catholic Falangist leader, and we shall equally not
hesitate to judge to which party the murderers belonged. Frango at
once declared that the country must be delivered and organized his
mercenaries, the Moors and Foreign Legionaries.

     Robles had got Franco appointed to the command in Morocco
where he had under his hand the force, which, as experience in the
revolt of 1934 had proved, could be relied upon to fight, and fight
brutally for its paymaster whatever the merits of the cause. In the
south of Spain, which is much more Catholic (largely for business 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               11

              THE VATICAN BURIES INTERNATIONAL LAW

reasons) than the Madrid and Barcelona regions, the command was
given to the brutal and fanatical Catholic Queipo de Llano, the
Spanish gentleman, who, in a broadcast from Seville during the war,
said that they would pound up the Bolsheviks to make mortar for the
rebuilding of the churches. As many more Catholic officers as
possible had been put in the higher commands in the army and navy.
Few of them had more military ability than Franco and de Llano, but
they were Catholic's, at least in profession.

     This had been done while Robles, the friend of the Jesuits,
was Minister of War (May to December, 1935), a year before Franco,
on July 19, 1936, led his noble band of crusaders for the Holy
Faith, the half-savage and fanatically Moslem Moors and the scum of
the Foreign Legion, across the straits to the South of Spain, where
his fellow-conspirators waited, No serious writer hesitates to
conclude that it was done in preparation for a revolt against the
government and Constitution to which these Spanish gentlemen had,
and like Alfonso the Great, taken an oath of loyalty. The
government leaders, in fact said, when the rebellion broke out,
that they were fully aware of the plot and did not fear it. They
believed that the far greater part of the Spanish army was loyal,
and this proved to be the case in Madrid and many other places.
Their conduct seems feeble and incompetent unless we suppose that
they regarded a revolt, which they would certainly defeat, as an
opportunity to destroy the growing menace of the Falangists.

     The early course of the war fairly justifies that expectation.
and one cannot say that they ought to have foreseen that Italy and
Germany would play the part of the First and Second Murderers.
Careful attention to Franco's pilgrimages to Berlin and Rome in
1936 might have warned them but we must admit that no one would
have expected France and Britain to look on placidly, and even give
most vital assistance, while German and Italian troops butchered
the heroic Spanish people and even, as in the bombing of Guernica,
coldly gave their airmen practice for the coming war on France and
Britain. 

     In the case of France Vatican influence counted very
materially. We shall see in a later book how close at this time was
the cooperation between the Vatican and what it called "the
government of Jews and Freemasons." For the shame and hypocrisy of
Britain's action, there is no excuse. The so-called Committee for
the Protection of Non-Intervention in Spain ought frankly to have
been called the Committee for the Protection of Intervention. The
very moderate supply of arms by distant Russia -- and even this
began only after the Italian intervention -- was made an excuse for
condoning the massive and indispensable assistance of Italy and
Germany. Nearer the truth was the plea that Mussolini "Could not
afford to see a Communist state established so near to Italy".
These French and British statesmen know now, to their cost, how
little they could afford to see a Fascist state created in Span.
But the plain truth which illumines the whole of that dark and
ghastly and stupid period of preparation, is that they did not want
to see a Socialist state set up anywhere, and, with all their
hypocritical professions, they murder the Spanish people, although
their Foreign Offices must have known that Communism was the
weakest element in the Frente Popular and there was no question of 
following the Russian political model in Spain.

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               12

              THE VATICAN BURIES INTERNATIONAL LAW

                               III

                  SPAIN AND THE CATHOLIC LEAGUE

     Whether or no Pacelli-Pius had from the start a further
intention than the restoration of the Church in Spain he clearly
saw it in time as part of a larger plan. For Mussolini, the
conquest of Spain was, part of his design of securing mastery of
the Mediterranean and cutting one of the main arteries of the
British Empire. For Hitler it was the removal of a possible menace
to his conquest of France and the possession of a bridge to Africa
when the time came to enslave the Italians as well as the French.
Blinded by their anti-Socialist zeal, no English statesman foresaw
this and realized of what enormous value to them in the coming
struggle against Fascism a democratic Spain would be. Pacelli
shared their "sacred fury" against Socialism, but the course of
events now gave him the plan of a bloc or League of Catholic Powers
by which he hopes to counteract Germany even if it is victorious,
and in any case to, in his own words, counterbalance the influence
of the American and British branches of his Church.

     There is no need to wait for the tranquil post-war days to
get a just estimate of the action of the Black International in
Spain. Even if there were not a scrap of documentary evidence no
one with even an elementary of the Vatican and of modern Spanish
history could daub that the plot was concerted and carried out in
the closest cooperation with the Church, which would gain most of
all by the success of the revolt.

     But there is plenty of evidence: not evidence of a secret
plot, but of the most open and enthusiastic support of the rebels
by the Spanish Church and the Vatican. There was nothing secret
about it. Whether Franco in his visit to Rome before the revolt
apprised Pacelli of his plans and asked the Papal blessing --
remember that this is just what the Irish rebels had done in 1916
-- does not matter. He was in the closest touch with the hierarchy
in Spain and as he raised the flag of revolt (and perjury) all the
Spanish bishops but three, who were in a delicate Position.
declared for him. Every priest and every convent welcomed the
rebels as they came along and helped them. It would be very
extraordinary if they had not done so, seeing that Franco came as
a crusader to smite the infidels, who, they said, had persecuted
them for five years. Catholics everywhere provided the mass of
traitors within the gates which has added a new term to military
literature: the Fifth Column.

     But the Papacy or its Secretary of State very soon made a
declaration which identified it with the holy war from the
beginning. Bishops, priests, and nun, who had understood that
Franco and his had pious colleagues had corrupted the entire army
and had, in the expectation of speedy victory, declared themselves
prematurely, had to fly before the just anger of the people and the
government troops. It will be remembered that with all his Catholic
troops and Moslem fanatics, his jail-birds of the Foreign Legion
and his Irish Brigade, his Germans, and his Italians, Franco took
two years to conquer half of Spain: a very singular situation if it
were true that the anti-clerics were a minority. A large number of 
bishops, priests, and nuns made their way to Rome, and on September
14, 1936, the aged them.
                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               13

              THE VATICAN BURIES INTERNATIONAL LAW

     The speech which was published, has none of the halting
senility of the Pope. It was a carefully-prepared address. lt would
in any case commit the Vatican to the side of the rebels as well as
the local hierarchy, but it is easy to recognize the accents of
Pacelli, to whose department the preparing of the address properly
belonged. It was this document written for broadcasting through the
Catholic to world, to which Pacelli was now appealing to work for
the extinction of Bolshevism in Spain, Russia, and Mexico. It was
published in England by the Catholic Truth Society with the title
'The Spanish Terror' and might be described as the bugle-call of
that war upon Bolshevism, which made the Church the intimate ally
of all the forces of privilege and of the vilest criminals in five
centuries of European history.

     Frankly, though the press generally reproduced some of its
sonorous phrases with deep respect, it was ludicrous. "All that was
most fundamentally human and most profoundly divine" was being
trodden under foot. This is bad enough when we reflect on the
splendid human service that the Socialist-Liberal coalition had
rendered and the clerical Fascists have destroyed, but Some of the
priests and nuns must have had difficulty in refraining from
Smiling when the Pope included amongst the victims "the fruitful
activity of lives wholly dedicated to religion, to science, and to
charity." The morals of the Spanish clergy are notorious, but their
devotion to science must be a profound secret. All these holy
things were "assaulted, violated, destroyed" -- it reads like the
first sentence of a famous speech of Cicero's -- "in the most
ruthless and barbarous ways, in an unbridled and unparalleled
confusion of forces so savage and cruel", etc. There had been a
"satanic preparation" -- a perfectly childish representation of the
facts -- for "the flame of hatred and savage persecution" such as
the Catholic Church, and it alone, is so apt to experience. There
was, in fine, an attempt to "subvert established order of every
kind from Russia to China, from Mexico to South America."

     The reader will not expect me to analyze this preposterous
stuff -- the Pope talks as if it were the anti-clericals Who had
revolted -- but he will reflect that it served Pacelli's purpose.
From the time of its distribution over the Catholic world and the
reproduction of its gorgeous phrases in the secular press it
prepared men to swallow every tale of Red outrages that the
Falangists cared to concoct; it made Catholics more blindly bitter
than ever against Russia; it put in a good word for the Pope's
Japanese friends; and it represented Hitler and Mussolini as
respectable crusaders who at great sacrifice, were striking a blow
for civilization. The Papal banner was the first foreign flag to
wave over Franco's diplomatic headquarters at Salamanca, and even
such ghastly massacres as that at Guernica did not receive a word
of disapproval. Catholic Portugal was encouraged to act as a
feeding ground for Franco's armies. American and British Catholics
poured their dollars or pounds into a common collecting box with
the bankers and stock brokers. Ireland and Poland -- pathetically
-- resounded with the slogan, "For God and Spain," and Duffy
pompously led his Irish Brigade to join the young English Tories
who were enlisted in a London hotel to serve under Franco. So mean
a disposition was create by the Pope's words that British Catholics
threatened to secede from the Trade Unions if the collection of 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               14

              THE VATICAN BURIES INTERNATIONAL LAW

funds for loyalist Spain was not stopped, and Catholic mothers in
some places compelled the Cooperative Movement to abandon its
humane plan of sending milk to the half-starved Spanish children.
The activity of British Catholics materially helped to sustain the
government in that ignoble surrender to Hitler and Mussolini by
allowing unlimited intervention, for which it has paid so dearly;
and they felt no misgivings when the Vatican, asked to join in the
French and British protest against the beginning of the bombing of
civilians, replied that it must avoid even the suspicion of
interfering in polities!

     At the time when the drowsy Pope spoke about the satanic
preparation and the unparalleled outpour of barbarism, phrases
which were simply an expression of Pacelli's bitter disappointment
at the failure of the rebellion -- no one seriously believes that
it would have won without the Italians and Germans -- there had
probably been a lot of rough treatment on both sides. The Moors
were furious at winning so little of the promised loot; the Spanish
people were furious because the Church again resorted to bloodshed,
and against a government returned to power by the majority of the
people after the priests had called up every Catholic voter in the
Republic. Some day we may know just what was done, on both sides,
in violation of what are called the usages of civilized warfare. We
cannot expect to learn this from Spain as it is today, but if any
man imagines that the priests and nuns just went on serenely saying
their prayers until the "sadistic" Reds burst in upon them he must
take his information from novels and Catholic newspapers.

     We are, however, not without helpful material. Two years
earlier there had been, as I said, a minor war of the same
combatants, and the Catholic press and much of the secular press
had given terrible stories of outrages by Socialists and
Communists, There always have been such stories since the French
Revolution, and Catholics, being forbidden to read the truth, still
cherish some of the picturesque lies -- like that of the prostitute
on an altar of Notre Dame -- told by the refugee priests of a
century and a half ago.

     After the suppression of the revolt of 1934, Lord Listowel and
Ellen Wilkinson went to Spain to investigate the stories. of
outrages. I had a talk with them after their return. They had the
written assurance of the President of the Republic Zamora (a
Catholic) and the Liberal premier Lerroux, that the stories of
outrage's committed by the anti-clericals were false, and when they
went to the supposed locality of the outrages to verify this, the
Catholic authorities prevented them, and, on the absurd pretense
that their inquiry so infuriated the people that their lives were
in danger, rushed them to the frontier. But in Spain itself the
boot was rather on the other foot. It was the champions of the
Church who had committed outrages; the Moors, the Catholic soldiers
or Civil Guards, and in some cases religious brothers. These
stories of Catholic brutality were severely investigated on the
spot by Professor Fernando de los Rios, an ex-Minister of
Education, Senior F.G. Ordas, a Liberal ex-Minister of Commerce,
and the lawyer Alvarez del Vayo, and they were found to be horribly
true. They made independent examinations and, unlike the retailers
of Red atrocities, they gave full names and places in their lengthy


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               15

              THE VATICAN BURIES INTERNATIONAL LAW

reports. Mrs. Leah Manning has a digest of these three reports in
the appendix of her book, 'What I Saw In Spain' (1934), and she
tells how some of the stories of Red outrages were fabricated.

     The best one can say, therefore, for Pacelli's scalding
rhetoric is that he had made no serious inquiry, but he inflamed
the entire Catholic world and so gilded the action of Hitler and
Mussolini in the eyes of the world in general that he is in a large
measure responsible for the failure of democracies to see what the
real and ulterior aim of those butchers was. On the other hand,
Pacelli, like every Catholic writer in the world, and a good many
others, perpetrated an utter absurdity and declined to notice it.
It is the contention that Spain is overwhelmingly Catholic, yet a
small minority of "satanic" folk carried every free election for
five years and held half the country for two year's against the
other half, and the fleets, air-fleets, tanks, and guns, of the two
most powerful nations in Europe! It is stupid to talk about Russia.
It did what it could, but for sheer geographical reasons it could
not do much.

     Before the end of the war a reluctant press felt itself
compelled to speak admiringly of the heroism of the Spanish people.
Theirs, on the anti-clerical side, was a war of the common folk,
the workers and their wives and sons and daughters. They had no
mercenary foreign troops, for the French and British volunteers,
hampered in every way in their enlistment by their governments,
were comparatively very few, and there were still less Russians, as
was proved at the close. It was the people of Spain who held up the
Spanish, German, and Italian armies, backed by Portuguese Fascist
help -- that was why Franco had at once secured the Portuguese
frontier -- and British and American funds for two years. Yet the
same papers that told the story continued to repeat that Spain was
Solidly Catholic, though every loyalist soldier, every boy and girl
who helped them, was under the direst ban of the Church. And
Catholics continued, and continue, to drone about that remarkable
minority of Satanists who are supposed to have carried every
Spanish election for five years and then somehow contrived to get
the people to fight passionately for them for two years. The
miracles of Lourdes are pale in comparison.

     Yet, in face of the most elementary common-sense, there is
hardly any lie that has been put out by the Vatican to cover its
policy of cooperation with crime and consecration of bloodshed that
has had a wider acceptance. I do not know whether George Seldes,
author of 'The Vatican,' is or is not a Catholic, but on this point
he beat the Jesuits, He says that there are only 30,000 non-
Catholics in Spain, and then he sees nothing to be explained in the
magnificent defense of the people of Spain under a shower of
anathemas from the Church! Then there is that quaint political
sport -- in the biological sense -- McGovern, the Catholic
Socialist Member of the British Parliament, the man who was chiefly
responsible for the abandonment of the anti-church policy of the
British advanced Labor; and his Church now gloats over the
destruction of Communism. He is supposed to have studied Spain on
the spot, and he is an honest man whatever you think of his
ability. He says that all but about one million of the Spaniards
are Catholics; which still leaves the tail wagging the dog for 
seven years in a most mysterious way.

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               16

              THE VATICAN BURIES INTERNATIONAL LAW

     Curiously enough the Catholic writer who comes nearest to the
truth is a Jesuit, the Irish priest, Father Gannon. In the 'Irish
Times' (January 23, 1937), he said that there are "ten or fifteen
million Catholics" in Spain. Apparently he thought it wise to admit
how far the corruption of the innocent people by the sadistic
minority (as the Catholic, Sir P. Gibbs deliberately calls them)
had gone. The phrase "ten or fifteen" is rather loose even for a
Jesuit, especially when you are thinking of millions. Let us split
the difference and say that the priest claims only about 12,000,000
Catholics in Spain out of a total population of 29,000,000. We get
near commons-sense at last, and we will not quibble with so
generous an admission. The only interpretation of Spanish life from
1931 to 1938 that is not completely ridiculous is that the majority
of the Spaniards had quitted the Church. That, means a loss of at
least 15,000,000 and fully explains the policy of the Black
International in that country.

     The Church shared the spoils, in fact got most of them. It was
restored to the despotic and parasitic position it had had before
1931, and the tinfoil Dictator, the most ridiculous specimen of the
brood in Europe, awarded it an annual subsidy of 65,000,000
pesetas. The country was and is, half-starved, reduced to
international beggary, but the Church has always been willing to
overlook that misfortune of its supporters. From all sides the
priests called for the rebuilding of their churches, seminaries,
monasteries, etc., and this made a further drain upon the slender
public purse. The remains of the dissipated General de Rivera,
whose character, Ibanez, had so ruthlessly revealed to the whole
civilized world, were transferred with gorgeous religious and
secular ceremony to the Escurial, the palace of the dead Kings of
Spain. If the flimsy structure of the new dictatorship lasts long
enough I expect to hear of him being canonized. Many young ladies
in Madrid and Paris will be interested.

     Naturally all the fine work of the Liberal-Socialist coalition
was destroyed. It is one of the gems of the Papal speech which I
quoted above that the satanic Reds destroyed science, whereas, they
had done splendid work in restoring science in Spain, and a child
would know that the rebels and their priests would ruin this. The
system of education which had drawn hundreds of students of
pedagogy from all parts was abolished. Manuals of history of a
childishly mendacious character were substituted for the excellent
text books and priests and nuns had the run of the class rooms.
Whatever dropped and withered there must be money for "religion."
So greedy was the Church that by the end of 1940 there was bitter
murmuring against the priests among the Falangists, and Franco was
compelled to defy the Vatican over the appointment of bishops. It
only required this "quarrel over investitures" to complete the
restoration of the Middle Ages. But the Vatican won, of course.
Without German, Italian, and clerical protection, the Spanish
people, low as they have fallen, would sweep away the perjured
adventurer and his popin-jay brothier-in-law in a month. The army
is divided and in large part ripe for rebellion.

     And the 15,000,000 who had quitted the Church? Turn back to
the French girl's narrative which I have quoted. Tens of thousands
of the rank and file of them are taken out of vile jails to sing
hymns and Fascist chants with a whip raised over their backs, while

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               17

              THE VATICAN BURIES INTERNATIONAL LAW

the chaplain enjoys his bottle in the background. Hundreds of their
leaders who survived the war are buried like dogs. Still the firing
squads are busy all over Spain. The American Catholic must not read
these things. He is told that there are only 30,000 folk, who had
quitted the Church and they are "under restraint." He will find it
out when Fascism is destroyed and something more painful than the
"terrific propaganda" which Cardinal Hinsley foresees will fall
upon his Church in Italy. France, Portugal, Spain, and Spanish
America. The Pope knows it and stakes everything on the victory of
Fascism.

     The Church linked Portugal with Spain in the Civil War. Here
again the record of the Black International is vile. To the middle
of the last century, Portugal had the same fate as Spain. A king of
disreputable character surrounded by fawning bishops, slew or
tortured tens of thousands of rebels against Church and feudalism.
But reform, or moderation set in earlier in that compact little
country than in Spain. When another disreputable monarch began to
play tricks in the early years of this century the middle-class
Liberals drove him out, set up a Republic and stripped the Church
of all its privileges. Then came the tragic dilemma -- feudalism or
Socialism, finance or freedom -- and before the specter of the down
the Reds, men took down their anti-clerical banners. Portugal
became a military dictatorship with the Church in full power once
more.

     Under President General Cremona and Premier Dr. Salazar,
Portugal is what is humorously called a corporative state. The late
Pope, who knew as much about economics and sociology as a child in
a primary school does, gave the Catholic world one of those
Encyclicals which it admires so much, saying that Italy's
corporative state is the ideal for reconciling capital and labor
and honoring the Church. Naturally, you would not expect a
churchman to notice that this corporative state was a ghastly
failure, even economically, in his own country, Italy; that crime
was rising by leaps and bounds, and the schools were rotting. In
Portugal, where more than half the people are still pious,
illiterate, and densely ignorant, it was comparatively easy; and
the Jesuits, who had been expelled, were brought back to help. So
the corporative state was established. What did it matter to the
Papacy that, concentrating power over capital and labor in one pair
of hands, it was the ideal form of state for an aggressive
imperialistic dictator? Mussolini must have smiled.

     We may take it that Pacelli was the chief author of the
Encyclical 'Quadragesimo Anno' (1931) in which the Pope summoned
all Catholic countries to adopt the form of the corporative state.
They were then a ragged regiment; Italy, Poland, Eire, and (more or
less) Hungary. To these Pacelli in 1934 added Austria and in 1935
most of the Republics of South and Central America. When  he saw
Germany and Italy guaranteeing the success of his plot in Spain,
and Portugal had bowed to the Papal orders in 1934, he began to
dream larger dreams. He worked, we shall see, in Yugo-Slavia, to
prepare the way for Mussolini's legions and win at least a Croatian
Church for the Vatican. He courted France and encouraged the
Rexists in Belgium. His dream took the shape of a bloc or League of
Catholic corporative states, very docile to the Black 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               18

              THE VATICAN BURIES INTERNATIONAL LAW

International, spanning the planet, following Mussolini's
"victorious eagles" eastward, ready in time to check either a
German Nazi empire in north Europe or a democratic Anglo-American
combination.

                               IV

             PAPAL COWARDICE IN ABYSSINIA -- AND WHY

     The Catholic writer Teeling (The Pope in Polities) is
generally understood to have made a protest in the name of Catholic
democrats against the anti-democratic policy of the Vatican. He is
not very emphatic on any point except the Papal attitude to the
conquest of Abyssinia, and he is far from satisfactory on the
point. He says that Catholics "sighed in vain" for a Papal
condemnation of Mussolini's crime, but "the poor old man" was
content with a refusal to bless the war, as Mussolini pressed him
to do, or to restrain the Italian Church from blessing it.

     It is something to have a Catholic writer admitting that all
the world condemned Mussolini except the Pope" (p. 130). The
Catholic press generally tried to twist vague Papal words into a
condemnation. But it is misleading to talk about the "poor old
man." Pacelli was the director of the Papal policy, and there was
nothing vague or evasive about it. For ages the Vatican has cast a
covetous eye on the Ethiopian Church. The existence of a branch of
Christianity which had as much right to call itself Catholic as
that of Rome and was equally Apostolic in its foundation, has
always been a challenge and a reproach to the Vatican, but it was
little use dreaming of getting the submission of the Greek Church.
At the Russian Revolution, we shall see, there was some hope of
inducing the atheistic new rules to sacrifice to the Vatican the
rich and populous branch of the Greek Church in that country, and
for Years the Papacy courted the Hammer and Sickle as eagerly as it
later courted the Swastika. The hope died, but the Vatican kept its
eye on such independent branches of the Church as that of Ethiopia.

     This was the bait which Mussolini dangled before the Pope in
1934. By the "gentleman's agreement" he had made with the Pope in
1929, he had, he supposed, secured Papal support in advance for his
imperial adventures, but the whole world was so shocked in 1934 by
Mussolini's obvious preparations to attack Abyssinia, so disgusted
that his "invincible legions" chose the weakest possible opponent,
that the Vatican had to consider its position in America and
Britain. The solution of the difficulty was Pacellesque, if I may
coin the word. Let the Pope pose as a moral coward; a poor old man
who was bewildered by the sudden development -- so bishops said in
America -- and its menace, and let the entire Italian Church
boisterously support Mussolini and secure the unanimous support of
the nation. The Vatican tried at a later stage to explain the
situation by saying that the Italian hierarchy and clergy acted in
this as Italians, not as representatives of the Church, and there
were Catholics in America who repeated this miserable subterfuge.
As if it were not one of the very strongest claims for the moral
influence of the Catholic Church that on any moral issue it
sublimely ignores national limitations and judges them in the light

 

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               19

              THE VATICAN BURIES INTERNATIONAL LAW

of eternal principle alone! You might as well imagine the police of
Washington consorting with criminals under the window's of the
White House as the Italian hierarchy acting on so delicate an issue
without Papal instructions.

     As to the Pope himself, which really means Pacelli, we will
not waste time discussing whether he condemned the war, especially
when we have Catholic writers saying that he did not, until someone
quotes a clear and verifiable word of condemnation. The editor of
the British Catholic paper (Catholic Times, July 17, 1936),
challenged by the Protestant Bishop of Durham, replied: "I grant
you that throughout these months of crisis the Holy Father has said
no word in favor of the League of Nations nor in favor of that
united stand against Italy, which was so much desired in this
country." Cardinal Hinsley, it is true, says in his Preface to
Rankin's eulogy of Pacelli, 'The Pope Speaks' (1940), that in his
presence the Pope, before the invasion of Abyssinia, spoke of "all
my efforts to prevent the barbarous tragedy." What a pity Hinsley
did not quote the words six years earlier and spare Catholics in
America and Britain so much pain and humiliation! And what a pity
Mussolini did not hear that the Pope was talking of his grand
imperialist design as "barbarous."

     Cardinal Hinsley does not think it necessary to explain why a
Pope who privately thought the invasion of Abyssinia barbarous had
not one word of public condemnation of it. He could be very
eloquent on events far away in Spain, of which he could have no
exact knowledge and on events still farther away and more difficult
to check in Mexico, Russia, and China. They hurt the Church. But on
an outrage which was organized under his nose, a tragedy which was
so notorious that all the world except himself condemned it, he had
nothing to say as a world-oracle. It would hurt the Church if he
said it.

     Once or twice he tried the tactics of that other famous
oracle, the ancient oracle of Delphi. On July 28, 1934, speaking
(domestically) on a saintly missionary who had worked in Abyssinia,
he glanced at the war-talk and said that he "hoped for peace,
truth, justice, and charity." On August 28th he had to address a
body of Italian Catholic nurses, many of whom were destined for the
war-zone, and he could hardly ignore it. He said, with a calculated
vagueness that Delphi never surpassed, that while folk abroad
described it as "a war of sheer conquest and nothing else", which
would certainly be an "unjust war", the Italian authorities said
that it was a war of defense against Abyssinian aggression and to
find room for some of Italy's surplus population (for which the
priests were even more responsible than Mussolini). He ended in a
mumble that God would find a way to a just peace. Italian Catholics
rejoiced that the Pope had endorsed Mussolini's motivation of the
war and we shall see that archbishop's declared it to be a war of
defense. American and British Catholics boasted that he had
denounced the war of conquest.

     It occurred to some that if there is a particle of truth in
the Catholic claim for the Papacy it was the Pope's duty to go
beyond abstract principles which everybody recognized and say in
plain Italian whether Mussolini's enterprise, which had not the 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               20

              THE VATICAN BURIES INTERNATIONAL LAW

least ambiguity in the eyes of the rest of the world, was or was
not criminal. Pacelli therefore had an explanatory note put in the
Osservatore, (August 29) saying that surplus population was "not by
itself a ground of war", which left matters just as they were.
American Catholics felt that all the gorgeous claims that their
apologists had made for the Papacy were stultified, and Price Bell
of the 'Chicago Daily News' was instructed to get the truth from
the Pope's own lips. He wrote a moving four-page article on
"interview" in 'Liberty' (October 19, 1935), but had to confess
that he had not got a word on Abyssinia from the Pope. One gathers
that he had just paid the usual fee from $10 upward, according to
the size of the crowd -- to be admitted to a reception.

     Pacelli knew that, after a little grumbling behind closed
doors American and British Catholics would, in their own interest,
submit to anything that the Pope said or did, so he let him pose to
the outside world as a moral coward and effectively satisfied
Mussolini by a glorious unity of the Italian Church in support of
the war. Professor Salvemini has collected the utterances of 7
cardinal archbishops, 23 archbishops, 44 bishops, and 6 archbishops
with titles abroad. It is almost enough to quote from the Papal
organ, the 'Osservatore' (August 22, 1935), the fact that from the
Eucharistic Congress at Teramo a telegram was sent to Mussolini in
the name of 19 archbishops and 57 bishops saying: "Catholic Italy
thanks Jesus Christ for the renewed greatness of the Fatherland
made stronger by Mussolini's policy." Will anyone suggest that the
dispatch of this telegram and the Publication of it in the Papal
newspaper were contrary to the wishes of the Pope and his vigorous
Secretary of State, the real and very despotic ruler of the Church?

     The prelates continued all through the war to keep Catholics
-- and practically all Italians were now compulsory Catholic --
loyal to Mussolini. They gave a most unctuous consecration to a
shameful war of aggression, barbarously conducted, and openly
represented it as a gain to the Church. In a diocesan letter of
October 15, 1935, the Bishop of Nocera explained that Ethiopia was
uncivilized be cause it was not subject to the Pope and the war
would be a great blessing for it:

          It is a People which, having became detached from Rome,
     can cannot get full benefit of the Christian ideas: which has
     not been able, therefore, to produce those beneficial
     conditions to which the West of Europe owes its greatness.
     Roman Catholic Italy has the duty of bringing to populations
     deprived of them its principles of equity, charity, and
     fraternity. We pray God that he should use Italy as His divine
     instrument for the evangelization of the whole world.

     One can say these things in a country where the Black
International controls education. A bishop ought at least to know
that until the 15th century the Abyssinian Church had had no
connection whatever with Rome; that submission to Rome was then
imposed from Portuguese as a condition of their help in saving the
country from the Moslem; and that it led to a grave demoralization
of Abyssinia and was fiercely rejected as soon as possible. And
note carefully the hope of the Black International that God will go
on to choose Italy to "evangelize" -- that is to say, bring into 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               21

              THE VATICAN BURIES INTERNATIONAL LAW

submission to the Vatican -- the whole world. We know how it was
evangelizing Abyssinia; with poison gas, bombing natives, and
massacre (as at Addis Ababa). The interesting point is the allusion
to Pacelli's growing Plan of a league of Catholic powers.

     A fortnight before this the Archbishop of Taranto had said
Mass in a submarine and given an address to the officers and men.
They were, he said, fighting a war of defense -- was there ever a
more brazen apology? -- not conquest, and it would not only relieve
Italy of over-population and supply it with raw material, but it
would lead to "the expansion of the Catholic faith". It was
therefore "a holy war, a crusade". The archbishop was worse than
the bishop and the cardinal-archbishop, Sehuster, of Milan, bead of
the Italian Church was worse than the archbishop. Speaking on
October 28 he said, as quoted by Salvemin:

          The Italian flag is at this moment bringing in triumph
     the Cross of Christ in Ethiopia to free the road for the
     emancipation of the slaves, opening it at the same time to our
     missionary enterprise.

     Apart from their lies about Red outrage one can at least
understand the action of the Spanish prelates in supporting Franco,
but these Italian prelates, the nearest to Rome and the most
rigorously controlled by the Vatican, consecrated the crime of
their dictator and their Papal Secretary of State with all entirely
nauseous mixture of greed for the country and greed for the Church.
I saw two of the picture postcards that then circulated in Italy.
One bore a map of Abyssinia showing treasures of corn, gold, oil,
etc., in different regions. The other was a tank taking a statue of
the Virgin to the Abyssinians.

     So it was to the end. When, in May, 1936, the Italians entered
Abbis Ababa and Mussolini announced victory, the church bells rang
everywhere and the churches were illuminated and decorated. There
was one exception, St. Peter's. Its bells rang -- because peace had
come, of course -- but it was not illuminated. The fox retained his
cunning, and probably Mussolini grudgingly allowed that he had to
save his face as well as he could in Britain and America. It had to
suffice that the Pope blessed "the triumphant happiness of a great
and good people for a peace that will further and will initiate the
true European and world-wide peace" (News Times and Ethiopia News,
October 31, 1936), and that the bishops fell over each other in
hastening to congratulate the Duce and his "defence of Christian
civilization". Not a word was said when Graziani perpetrated one of
the foulest massacres of this foul period as when the butcher's
butcher-son published a book glorifying war as such and explaining
what fun it was to drop bombs on natives.

     Italy did little for Abyssinia. Production fell, and a mere
title of the surplus population of Italy which was supposed to be
panting for room beyond the seas would go to Africa. The Italian
authorities made no haste to educate the natives, and such
industries as were set up were reserved for Italians. Abyssinians
were not allowed to become artisans. They were to be the hewers of
wood and the drawers of water. Make all allowance you like for
Italy's lack of capital, of which Mussolini had drained the 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               22

              THE VATICAN BURIES INTERNATIONAL LAW

country, but the truth cannot be obscured, Mussolini wanted only
two things: the "glory" of founding an Italian empire and a
backward country for Italian's to exploit. And in 1937, the
'Osservatore' announced, the Pope blessed this enterprise by
awarding the Golden Rose, the supreme honor that the Papacy has for
mere women, to the Queen of Italy as Empress of Abyssinia.

     He had ground to do this. Whatever else Italy failed to do for
the Abyssinians it spent a vast sum in giving them the treasure of
the Papal faith. At government expense priests, monks, and nuns
were shipped out and chalets and houses built for them. There is an
account of it all in the 'International Review of Missions,'
(January, 1937, p. 103). The Vatican sent out a set of Ethiopian
type and a press, and Italian Catholic papers told how the natives
eagerly pressed for the good words. Protestant missionaries found
that they might as well pack up. Moslem and Christian had hitherto
shown a mutual toleration. Now they were set against each other
Whatever the state gained or failed to gain by the conquest of
Abyssinia the Church was determined to profit. All this, the
Catholic protests, follows inevitably from Catholic principles. So
much the worse for those principles; though we seem to have heard
a hundred times that the Church emphatically disowns the maxim that
the end justifies the means.

     It is impossible to write these chapters on the action of the
Black International in Spain and Italy without irony and
repugnance, and many will find that it raises a problem about the
attitude of the American Catholic layman. As far as Spain is
concerned there is little to explain. His daily paper spoke of the
Reds probably in the same language as his Catholic weekly.
Bolshevism was growing like a poisonous plant in Spain, and
practically all the world wanted it eradicated. There was, it is
true, that intriguing paradox which I have discussed; how the Red
tail -- and such a small one -- had succeeded in wagging the
Catholic dog for seven whole years. But when there is a question of
smiting Bolshevism, you do not notice these trifles.

     In the case of Abyssinia the situation was very different. The
whole world, outside Eire, Poland, and a few other potato patches,
condemned Mussolini, and the facts were not in dispute. Such
writers as Seldes and Teeling make it clear that there was some
dissatisfaction in the body of the Catholic laity, but the tone of
the Catholic press and the utterances of the hierarchy show that it
did not reach very far. Yet you find it impossible to believe that
the Catholic men and women whom you meet in business or at the club
or a friend's house, are so docile to their priests that they will
read without a shudder the shocking language of the Italian
prelates I have quoted, or be easily persuaded that turning
Oriental Catholics into Roman Catholics throws a mantle of justice,
if not nobility, over Mussolini's enterprise.

     I cannot here go deeply into this matter, but I may make one
point. The relation of a Catholic to his priest is not the same as
that of a Protestant to his minister. Periodically he hears a
sermon on the priesthood, and the gist of it is that, if he accepts
the creed at all, he must regard the priest as something totally
different from any other minister of religion. The preacher insists


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               23

              THE VATICAN BURIES INTERNATIONAL LAW

that he shall not look to the priest as a man -- his intelligence
and even his character do not matter -- but to his office and
powers. He can turn bread and wine into God (in the Mass) and can
forgive sins. He has, whatever his personality, been endowed with
tremendous supernatural powers. You may find this difficult to
follow, but a Catholic is as strictly bound to believe these things
as to believe in God. That medieval superstition, on which the
Church still literally insists, is the root of the power of the
priests. That is why, for instance, they can do what no other
ministers can do, such as to forbid a Catholic to read any
literature that criticizes the Church or its teaching, and in this
way they protect the superstition which is the root of their power.
Catholicism is not a collection of beliefs. It is an organic whole,
and you cannot be a Catholic and question a single "article of
faith." If in addition to this you remember the tremendous hypnotic
force wielded by the Church, corresponding very closely to the
German boasting of Aryan blood or the Italian boasting of
Mussolini's infallibility you will begin to understand. But it is
not a case of "to understand all is to forgive all." Your
conclusion is more apt to be: Away with the whole damn lot -- to
give a rough translation of Voltaire's polite phrase.

                                V

                THE JAP GETS A GOLD MEDAL FOR HIS
                       'CHINESE INCIDENT'

     It is one of the consequences of this doctrinal mentality of
the Catholic that he can be persuaded to accept propositions which
to you and me look childish. I am, of course, speaking of the
general body of Catholics and am quite aware that you will meet a
man here and there who seems fairly liberal; though you will find
that either he is not liberal at all on these dogmas which the
Church, for reasons (as they are the basis of the power of the
clergy), declares indispensable, or he is a Catholic only
nominally. One such proposition is that the Catholic faith is so
unique, so profoundly important for this life and the next, that
when there is a prospect of getting further millions of men to
accept it, he, in spite of his having the same sentiments as we
have, agrees to wars, executions, imprisonments without trial,
compulsory hymn-Singing and jailers'
whips. After all, the Church has "the right of the sword" over
these people. That is an indispensable article of the creed.

     A second proposition which is relevant here is -- this will
seem incredible to any who are not familiar with Catholic
literature -- that the Catholic accepts the belief, on which the
priests insist, that his Church is hated and persecuted by wicked
men with a rancor that other Churches do not experience. It is a
sheer legend, but very useful to the clergy. For the last fifty
years at least the Catholic Church has been treated by non-
Catholics with an indulgence, even an admiration, which has enabled
it to secure by intrigue, a power far out of proportion to the
number of its members in democratic countries. In Catholic doctrine
-- again indispensable doctrine -- a large part of the explanation
of this legendary hatred is the devil. Naturally he hates, and
moves bad men to hate, that which is holiest . . . I feel that I
ought to apologize for talking like this to educated men and women,

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               24

              THE VATICAN BURIES INTERNATIONAL LAW

but believe me, that is the ordinary Catholic mentality. And it is
in virtue of this proposition that Bolshevism is in the Catholic
mind associated with the devil, and he is ready to cry for its
extinction in Russia. Spain, and Mexico. You will not be so
churlish as to remind him that he is really calling for aggressive
war.

     Hence the Vatican's beautiful friendship with Japan and
positive hatred of Russia. We will consider in a later book the lie
which is used to give an odor of sanctity to this hatred, the claim
that Russia persecutes religion, but by 1934, when the British
government had officially reported to the contrary, as we shall
see, any ground for a charge of persecution had disappeared. Yet
when, in that year, Russia applied for admission to the League of
Nations, the Vatican whipped up its representatives at Geneva to
oppose the application. I will deal at length with the matter
later, but it is necessary here to point the contrast. Pacelli
stirred every nerve to get a great civilization, which already had
the finest record in Europe of humane service and social
betterment, publicly insulted and represented as a nation far
inferior to Mussolini's Italy or Piludski's miserable Poland (which
was at the time very seriously persecution religion). On the other
hand, he drew nearer to Japan. Russia had long discarded the idea,
which some had had, of spreading Socialism by aggressive war. It
was, if only in its own interest, very earnest for the peace of the
world. But it was damned and vituperated by Rome. Japan was just as
clearly aiming at, indeed already engaged in, a disgraceful
aggressive war. The Vatican took it to its bosom.

     The point arises here because just in that year there was some
prospect of war between Russia and Japan, and Catholics everywhere
loudly proclaimed that, should it occur, they would side with
Japan. "In the event of a war between Japan and Russia," said an
editorial in one of the leading British Catholic papers, (Catholic
Times, November 23, 1934) "Catholics would sympathize with Japan,
at least in so far as religion is concerned, so let us beware of an
Anglo-American 'bloc' against Japan involving us on the side of
Russia." These apologists for a bad case find it difficult to write
plain English. The editor obviously means that British and American
Catholics would hope on religious grounds -- that is to say, for
the profit of the Church in China and Japan -- to see Japan beat
Russia. We do not think less of sympathy with crime because its
motive is said to be religious. It is only one mare of a hundred
proofs that the interest of the Church, which always the means the
interest or profit of the Black International, is different from
and often opposed to the interest of the race.

     In the second book I described the beginning of the alliance
of the Vatican with Japan. The country had just taken the first
step in a monstrous plan of aggression and exploitation which must
have been known in every Foreign Office in the world, and its
conquest of Manchuria was sternly condemned everywhere. The French
were, as we shall see, then playing a dangerous game, for which
they now pay so dearly, with the Vatican, and -- I quoted this on
French clerical authority -- the advised the Japs to apply to the 




                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               25

              THE VATICAN BURIES INTERNATIONAL LAW

Pope for recognition. As the idea was put to the Japanese by French
missionaries, you may wonder whether the initiative did not come 
from the Vatican; but you will have to be content to wonder, as the
beginning of the negotiations is left in obscurity.

     It was not difficult to persuade the Japs to apply to Rome.
Most of the educated and ruling men of Japan are atheists of the
type who regard religion as a very useful institution -- for women
and workers, In 1871, when the Europeanization of the country
began, they sent a large and unique deputation to Europe to study
Christianity and report whether it was a more 'suitable -- that is
to say, more effective in securing the docility of the masses --
religion to give to their people than Buddhism. Lafeadio Hearn
tells how their report on the influence of Christianity in its own
field was so poor that they abandoned the idea, but much water had
gone down to the sea since 1871. One change was that the Pope was
again a secular as well as a spiritual monarch, since Mussolini had
created the state of the Vatican City, and the mixture of small
sovereignty and vast international religious power gave him a
unique position.

     We saw what happened. Even Pacelli dare not, while the whole
world was inflamed against Japan, pledge the Pope as a temporal
ruler to alliance with Japan, but he appointed a Vicar Apostolic
"to negotiate with the government of Manchukuo about religious
affairs." Other powers might sacrifice their trade-interests to
their principles by declaring that they would have no truck with a
bloody usurpation, but the interests of Catholic missions are too
sacred to be sacrificed for mundane considerations. Whether there
was an understanding that the Vatican promised to work to prevent
the League of Nations from applying sanctions to Japan, as it later
worked for the exclusion of Russia, we do not know. The Vatican
does not issue a Blue Book -- not even a Little Blue Book -- when
it has completed a deal. Few would trust the book if it did.

     What we do know, however, is enough. The representatives of
the Vatican in Manchukuo and Japan worked so amiably with the army
and the government that by 1934 the French Catholic writer I quoted
was able to boast that "no Japanese prince or mission now passes
through Rome without paying its homage to the Sovereign Pontiff."
Incidentally, French trade in the East benefitted very happily.
American Catholics raised their familiar cry of libel of Holy See,
wicked suspicion, etc., when the growing intimacy was mentioned in
the press, and it transpired that the news had came from the
clerical officials (whose pockets are always wide open) of the
Vatican City pres's bureau that negotiations were in progress for
an exchange of ambassadors between Tokyo and the Papacy. There was
more indignation and surprise that people should malign Holy Church
so much; and on May 5, 1935, the Papal organ, the 'Osservatore,'
joyously announced that the Pope was sending a representative to
Tokyo and the Mikado sending an ambassador to the Papal Court.

     You make short work of all the Catholic sophistry, about this
ominous development if you consider the run of events at the time.
The world at the conquest of Manchuria had evaporated. Trade-
interests had again beaten principles. Sanctions against Japan had
not been imposed, and the trading nations were on friendly terms 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               26

              THE VATICAN BURIES INTERNATIONAL LAW

with the Jap and willing to take his word, as they would take
Mussolini's word after Abyssinia and Hitler's word after Austria,
that absolutely no further advance would be attempted; while all
three adventurers were quite openly dangling before the eyes of
their respective peoples a program of conquests that promised
wealth to every class in the nation.

     The case of the alliance of the Pope and his Yellow Brother"
was the worst of all. At the beginning of the century Count Hayashi
(Secret Memoirs, 1915), had written that "Japan must keep quite and
lull suspicion and wait her day; then not only put the meddling
powers out but meddle herself." After 1930, with the growth of an
aggressive Fascism in Europe and a general profession of admiration
of its efficiency, the Japanese concluded that they need not keep
quiet in their own country; they could not, indeed, if they were to
educate their people in the ground plan of dominating Asia. One of
the most spluttering firebrands was Yosuke Matsuoka. He had been
educated in America and was a Christian, so he was very useful for
lulling suspicions abroad, especially in America, but he was very
patriotic in Japan. Upton Close in his book, 'The Challenge,'
translates an article which Matsuoka published in 1933. It
coruscated  with gems like this: "The mission of the Yamata race is
to prevent the human race from  becoming devilish ... The one
nation not subject to the universal law of decline is that which is
ruled by a divinity and a permeated by the spirit of the Gods ...
the fated time has come to effulge its benefits to the world". Not
very Christian, but plain enough. At the following New Year,
Japanese stores displayed gorgeous paint-and-pasteboard panoramas
of Japan's coming victory, the sinking of the American fleet, etc.

     This was the symphony of events which accompanied the
negotiations in Pacelli's opulent chambers in the Vatican. Let us
charitably suppose that in 1935, Matsuoka earnestly assured Pacelli
that Japan would not steal another acre of Chinese soil, that
Pacelli was simple-minded enough to believe him, and that the
highly favored Catholic missionaries in Japan did not report to the
Vatican that the entire country, including the Buddhist and Shinto
priests, was joyously chanting the national anthem of domination of
the East. A Catholic can probably believe that, although the
steeling of Jehol from China had already followed the stealing of
Manchuria. But in 1935 the sacred representative of the Papacy in
Tokyo would find it one of his first duties to report that, under
cynically mendacious pretexts, the Japanese were moving south over
China proper. By June, 1935, they had appropriated a further vast
area of China. In November, 1936, they tried to set up a puppet
government for five whole provinces besides Manchuria.

     In short, from that day to this, it has been one long story of
conquest officially described in the most brazen language. It was
not a war, but an "incident" -- thus escaping the economic
inconveniences of a war -- it was for the "cooperative prosperity"
of China, Japan, Europe, and America, it was just a police measure,
and so on. And all the time it was exultingly represented in Japan
itself as the mere beginning of a career of conquest that would
enrich every class in the country. It was, further, a war conducted
with the full bestiality of the methods of the Pope's allies.
Brutality to civilians in actual fighting was supplemented by
brutality after conquest. The Chinese subjects were debased with 

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               27

              THE VATICAN BURIES INTERNATIONAL LAW

dope and exploited mercilessly. Soldiers and officers used Chinese
women as Goths and Vandals had never used Roman Women. A Chinese
lady told me of an incident reported to her by her family in China:
an old woman in the occupied zone traveling from village to village
was raped six times in a few hours by soldiers of the nation which
is "ruled by a divinity and permeated by the spirit of the gods."
. . .

     By 1941 the whole diabolical plan was clear. Japan's service
was to be to draw off a very large part of the Russian forces to
the East while the "crusade" destroyed Russia in Europe. We now 
know -- if anybody required any evidence -- that the Russian
campaign was decided and plotted very early in 1941 after the
failure to reduce England by aerial bombardment or invasion, which
was originally intended to precede the attack on Russia. Matsuoka;
the Versatile was sent to Europe. He visited Hitler and Mussolini;
and the 'Osservatore' (March 31, 1941) told with pride how he
visited Pope Pacelli. Did he carefully conceal from Pacelli that
the war for the extinction of Bolshevism, the bloodiest war in
history, the most ardent desire of the Pope, was to be launched?
That Japan, besides its designs in Southern Asia and its bestiality
in China, was to help by destroying Russia and threatening to
intercept American supplies? Believe that if you can. the Vatican
organ tells us that at the close of their cordial interview, the
Pope presented Matsuoka with a gold medal; and Matsuoka declared in
the Italian press that his talk with the Pope was "the prettiest
moment in my life."






                          ****     ****

    Reproducible Electronic Publishing can defeat censorship.



   The Bank of Wisdom is a collection of the most thoughtful,
scholarly and factual books. These computer books are reprints of
suppressed books and will cover American and world history; the
Biographies and writings of famous persons, and especially of our
nations Founding Fathers. They will include philosophy and
religion. all these subjects, and more, will be made available to
the public in electronic form, easily copied and distributed, so
that America can again become what its Founders intended --

                 The Free Market-Place of Ideas.

   The Bank of Wisdom is always looking for more of these old,
hidden, suppressed and forgotten books that contain needed facts
and information for today. If you have such books please contact
us, we need to give them back to America.

                          ****     ****



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               28


                        27 page printout

    Reproducible Electronic Publishing can defeat censorship.

          This file, its printout, or copies of either
          are to be copied and given away, but NOT sold.

          Bank of Wisdom, Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                          ****     ****

Edited by E. Haldeman-Julius

THE BLACK INTERNATIONAL              No. 5

                    HITLER DUPES THE VATICAN

               HOW THE PAPACY WAS SOLD IN AUSTRIA
            AND SOLD CIVILIZATION IN CZECHO-SLOVAKIA

                        by Joseph McCabe

                  HALDEMAN-JULIUS PUBLICATIONS
                     GIRARD  -- : --  KANSAS

                          ****     ****

  CHAPTER
     I    The Church Sells Austria to the Hunmen ............... 1

    II    The Approach to Munich ............................... 7

   III    The Murder of Czecho-Slovakia ........................ 13

    IV    Why France Betrayed the Czechs ....................... 19

     V    On the Eve of the World-Tragedy ...................... 23

                          ****     ****

                            Chapter I

             THE CHURCH SELLS AUSTRIA TO THE GUNMEN

     H.G. Wells, who confessed to me a year ago that he had become
convinced that I was right about the danger of Rome -- he had more
than once amiably ridiculed my preoccupation with it -- said one of
his superbly audacious things about it recently (September 27); and
he said this to the most distinguished body the British Association
for the Advancement of Science ever got together. This generation,
he thought, might have to endure a series of wars waged "in the
name of those dead religions that cumber the world today." And he
went on to make a parenthetic remark which must have made learned
eyes open wide behind their horn-rimmed spectacles:

     "A dead religion is like a dead cat -- the stiffer and more
rotten it is, the better it is as a missile weapon."

     It is obvious what religion he had in mind: the religion of
Petain, Weygand, and Laval, of Leopold of Belgium, of De Valera,
Vargas, and Salazar, of the Quislings of Austria, Czecho-Slovakia,
and Croatia, the religion of that Black International which has for

                         Bank of Wisdon
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               1

                    HITLER DUPES THE VATICAN

ten years helped the arch-criminals of history to dupe and enfeeble
the democracies and to smirch our civilization with their foulness
and brutality. In the day of reckoning it must stand in the dock
with the other murderers.

     In these little books I prepare the indictment and furnish the
evidence. In the early stage's of this corruption of civilization
the four masters of crime -- Italy, Germany, Japan, and the Black
International, which we may justly personify in the present Pope,
Pacelli-Pius -- were isolated, like crooks working in different
quarters of a large city. Japan was brooding over an old plan to
exploit Asia which had been drawn up when Mussolini was a ragged
little country lad sweeping the floor of his father's saloon, and
Hitler was begging nickels of his drunken and disreputable father
in the sticks. The delicate Japanese nostrils would have quivered
at sight of them. Even in 1922, when the industrialists and
royalists of Italy raised Mussolini, for their own purposes and to
his astonishment, to the position of a prince, Japan turned down
the overtures of the Vatican. Seven years later the sharp-eyed
Japanese statesmen saw the Papacy make Mussolini's tottering throne
safe and win world-recognition of it for him by a formal alliance,
and they now turned to the Vatican and asked it to -- for a
consideration -- render the same service to themselves, which it
did. Then Hitler, impressed by the value of this holy alliance,
sought the same spiritual assistance of the Black International and
got it.

     So the plot, using the international organization of the Roman
Church to lull suspicion in other countries, was unified and took
on cosmic proportions. Germany, Italy, and Japan were to rule and
exploit the earth. The Pope -- he thought -- would be the universal
chaplain, with the plan in reserve, of a League of Catholic power's
strong enough to cheek any trickery of Hitler. That will be cold
history -- or an epitaph -- in a few years. I differ from Wells
about those "wars of religion" in the future. If this generation
which he and I will soon quit does not emasculate the Black
International when this war is over it will deserve all it gets,
but I have faith in it.

     In earlier books I described the insidious preparatory moves
in this collegial plot. Under the noses of the democracies, which
actually applauded year by year except, for a time, in the case of
Manchuria and Abyssinia, 200,000,000 folk were brought under what
is politely called the authoritarian regime and added to the
200,000,000 of Germany, Italy, and Japan . . . Wait a bit, you
protest. Where do you get these figures? Nobody in 1936 drew our
attention to this remarkable development. I need say only: add up
the populations of the stolen provinces of China, of Fascist South
America, of Austria, Abyssinia, etc., and then find out why your
oracles did not warn you in 1936 or 1937.

     I have shown that the Black International played a very active
and important part in this preparation for the launching of the
plot in 1939. Can anybody even profess to doubt the value of the
assistance it gave in destroying democracy in Austria, Spain, and
Spanish America and supporting the annexation of China and
Abyssinia? To this you must add its help in keeping Hungary, Eire, 


                         Bank of Wisdon
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               2

                    HITLER DUPES THE VATICAN

and Poland Fascist, in recommending Fascism (politely called the
corporative state) in a solemn Papal Encyclical (Quadragesimo Anno
1931) to the entire Catholic world, in working on Catholic
sentiment in France, Belgium, Britain, Holland, and America, and in
sustaining the hatred of Russia. We return later to these points.

     By 1938 the Axis on which Europe was to run was firmly
constructed and ready to operate. Italy was to have Europe south of
the Danube, and an African empire. Germany to have all north of
that river. Mussolini, the Napoleon of the South, little dreaming
that by 1941 he would be an old soldier on crutches begging coppers
from Hitler, was blind to the emphatic statement in Mein Kampf that
there is no room in Europe for two great powers. The rest of the
world was still dreaming its dream of the benevolent and beneficent
destruction of Socialism everywhere by these apostles of order and
discipline. So Hitler made a bolder move: one that might provoke,
and ought to have provoked, war.

     He needed Austria and Czecho-Slovakia, Hungary was in the plot
and very loyal to the Vatican; and in any case Pacelli was to visit
it in 1938. With the control of Austria, Czecho-Slovakia and
Hungary the conquest of the Balkans was assured, the broad road to
Turkey and the East was open, and the blockade by the British
fleet, on which small-minded British-statesmen relied, was deprived
of its sting. The first step was to get Austria and the Danube, and
in this the Black International was very useful.

     In the summer of 1938 I discussed this annexation of Austria
with an important German Nazi. He pleaded first that there was no
annexation. It was an "adherence" (Anschluss) of the German people
of Austria to their natural national unit. The facility with which
America accepted this plea is dangerous. Germans will raise it
strongly at the settlement -- quite recently a German Socialist
refugee insisted on it in conversation with me -- and it is ominous
that British statesmen never name the Austrians amongst the peoples
they are going to liberate. However, the chief interest here is an
incidental remark that my Nazi friend made. "If," he said, "you had
gone to war over Austria, you would have found that we Germans had
not enough petrol at the time to last more than ten days." He was
an important industrialist, intimate with some of the leaders, and
it was very clear to me that he was convinced of this.

     How much the Vatican had to do with the criminal failure of
France and Britain to begin arming at once -- allowing that they
were not in a position to fight in the spring of 1938 -- and
drawing nearer to Russia we cannot say, but do not for a moment
imagine that here I raise a wild and groundless suspicion. In 1937,
as we shall see later, Pacelli had visited Paris -- the first Papal
Legate to do so since the fall of Napoleon -- and on New Years'
Day, 1938, Paris had the piquant spectacle of a representative of
the Pope decorating and kissing its freethinking Premier and other
Ministers. There was much besides this, but we will deal with the
whole question of the corruption of France in a later book.

     We are here not simply dealing with the overt action of the
Vatican, which as in the case of Abyssinia and the Italian Church,
often finds it convenient to act through the local hierarchy and 


                         Bank of Wisdon
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               3

                    HITLER DUPES THE VATICAN

itself remain silent. We are studying the share of the Black
International in the world-debasement and tragedy. As far as
Pacelli-Plus is concerned it is enough that he persisted in his
attempts to conciliate Hitler and never said a word of the mildest
censure of Germany's action in Austria. He knew that Mussolini had
agreed to it as part of the general plan. But that the Church in
Austria enthusiastically supported Hitler is not disputed, and no
section of the Church was more docile to the Vatican. We shall see
in a moment the trickery by which it was represented in America
that the Austrian Church acted independently of the Vatican.

     The way had been prepared, we saw, by the Church poisoning
what the Annual Register calls "the Socialist watch-dog." Hitler
would certainly not have had a walk-over in Austria if the Social
Democrats, who firmly held Vienna and Linz and had hundreds of
thousands of followers in the country, had still been strong in
1988. The Catholic Chancellor, Schusdhnigg, was himself vigorously
opposed to annexation, and it is interesting to speculate what
would have been the effect of an appeal to Czecho-Slovakia, with
its magnificent Skoda arsenal close at hand, Russia, and the
Socialists and Radicals of France were there. The Church, by
destroying them, destroyed this early chance of defeating the
world-plot. It had killed the Socialist leaders, had put tens of
thousands of the more spirited Socialists in jail, and had drilled
the country into docility to itself.

     For Austria was, as we saw, a theocracy, a priest-ruled state
as not even Poland or Eire was. Dollfuss, who assassinated the
Socialists in 1934 after consultation with Pacelli, was promptly
assassinated by the Nazis. His successor, Schuschnigg, hated the
Nazis and was opposed to annexation, but the last word was with
Cardinal Innitzer, bead of the Austrian Church; and he had the
support in the Catholic government of Seyss-Inquart, who was a
Catholic and a Nazi and was prepared at any time to stab his leader
in the back. The main fact is, however, that since the suppression
of the Socialists in Vienna in 1934, the whole country was
prostrate at the feet of the cardinal. Socialists were whipped into
silence and the whole scheme of education, in school and press,
imposed absolute docility to the Church.

     That there was an understanding between Cardinal Innitzer and
Hitler, who made his usual glib promises to respect and protect the
Church, nobody denies. When Hitler marched into Vienna on March 13,
1938, all the church-bells in Austria rang, and a Swastika flag
waved over the ancient Cathedral. Two days later Innitzer had a
cordial interview with Hitler, and the cardinal and four of his
leading bishops issued a manifesto summoning all Austrians to vote
for Hitler in the coming plebiscite. The cardinal wrote "Heil
Hitler" after his signature. It is a sufficient refutation of the
plea that the Austrian's wanted to join Germany that Hitler angrily
refused to ask them this by a plebiscite as Schuschnigg proposed.
Hitler turned the idea into a farce by making it a plebiscite of
the whole German nation. In this farce Innitzer and his bishops
concurred and ordered all Austrians -- they were now all Catholics
in Church law -- to support Hitler, calling him the man "whose
struggle against Bolshevism and for the power, honor, and unity of
Germany corresponds to the voice of Divine Providence."


                         Bank of Wisdon
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               4

                    HITLER DUPES THE VATICAN

     Was a supreme Church authority with a large clerical staff
really ignorant of Hitler's true plan and motive? They spoke a
common language, remember, and were near neighbors, and there was
not the least secrecy about Hitler's plan to exploit Europe, If
Innitzer understood the Nazi aim -- and it is incredible that he
did not -- his association of it with "the voice of Divine
Providence" was blasphemous from the religious viewpoint and
loathsome from any angle.

     But did Innitzer take this line upon instruction from or
without consulting the Papal Secretary of State? It is not material
for my purpose to settle this, as we are studying the share of the
Black International as a whole. It happens, however, that the
question was referred to the Vatican by Catholics of other
countries, probably America, who were outraged by this gross
interference in politics, and in favor of a corrupt and very
dangerous schemer. And I quote the facts about the Jesuitical
action of the Vatican from a Catholic writer, C. Rankin, in his
flattering biography of Pacelli-Plus (The Pope Speaks, 1940).

     On April 1st, apparently in reply to Catholic complaints of
Inititzer's conduct -- for so public a rebuke of a cardinal would
otherwise be unprecedented -- a Jesuit speaker on the Vatican Radio
censored the Austrian cardinal and regretted that he had not
recognized "the wolf in sheep's clothing." It is clear that this
brought German protests, for the Vatican organ then declared that
the radio talk was not official. Even the pious and rather obtuse
Ransom adds that "it was characteristic of the extreme delicacy of
the situation" that this denial was not published but was
"telephoned direct to foreign correspondents by persons instructed
by the Vatican to do so." He seems to be unaware of the irony of
his words. The Osservatore said that Innitzer's action was not
authorized: Radio said that it was opposed to Vatican policy and
anonymous officials in the Vatican press bureau then said that the
criticisms of Innitzer were not authorized. The cream of the joke
is that all three -- radio, printing press, and press bureau -- are
in the Pope's back yard, so to say, and would not dare to say a
word on a matter of importance without consulting the Secretariat
of State. About this time some American film company put into
circulation a very impressive film, with most edifying and largely
untruthful commentary on work in the Vatican City. It did not point
out the convenience of the above arrangement.

     Innitzer was invited to Rome to explain his action, and the
Vatican was careful not to declare that he had been censured.
Instead of this, the Osservatore on April 6 gave a long and
sympathetic account of the cardinal's reasons for his action.
Keesing's Contemporary Archives gives the gist of Innitzer's
arguments, as published in the Swiss press at the time, but there
is no need to consider them here. The Black International had
rendered a new and most important service to the crooks, and the
Vatican had neatly dodged the censure of Catholics in democratic
countries.

     Pacelli knew that, as we have seen several times, local
Catholic hierarchies will, in their own interest, finally submit to
anything that the Papacy does. For a year or two Mundelein had 


                         Bank of Wisdon
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               5

                    HITLER DUPES THE VATICAN

roused American Catholic's to a white-hot indignation against the
Nazis for persecuting the Church and besmirching the fragrant lives
of the communities of lay brothers. You would expect apoplexy when
the news came that the Church had sold Austria to the Nazis, and
given them control of the Danube, and smoothed the path of their
bloody ambition, yet there was only a momentary flutter. Catholics
bowed to the "unauthorized" assurance that Innitzer had not
consulted the Vatican, and, as the world at large soon forgot
Austria and resumed its admiration of Nazi efficiency, the matter
was dismissed.

     One needs no documentary evidence that this conspiracy between
the Austrian Church and the Nazis was directed from Rome. National
branches of the Church of Rome are bound to consult the Papacy
before taking action on any issue of grave importance. That is what
the Secretariat of State is for. And when the issue is one that
affects other countries and the international policy of the Vatican
the obligation to consult headquarters is so strong that an evasion
of it is unthinkable. The question of joining Austria to Germany
was clearly of this character. Such union would not only strengthen
Hitler's position to a very important extent, so that it was a most
valuable opportunity for one of those bargains for which the
Vatican is always alert, but to put an additional 7,000.000
Catholics under Nazi rule after what had happened to the Church in
Germany this was so serious a matter that the suggestion that
Innitzer acted on his own initiative may be dismissed as frankly
childish.

     But, while the concurrence and lead of the Vatican is certain,
the ground of its policy is not clear. The key to it seems to be
the extraordinary persistence of Pacelli in trusting the promises
of Hitler. He had in 1932 made, in return for valuable service, a
promise of a very favorable agreement with the Vatican. He had
immediately dishonored the agreement, yet Pacelli and the German
bishops had continued to appeal to him. In 1936 he had opened the
series of vice-trials of priests and monks which had dealt the
Church a heavier and more ignominious blow than ever, yet the
Vatican had, with occasional mild complaints about persecution and
paganism -- never about crime and brutality until Catholic Poland
was threatened with extermination -- remained friendly. We shall
see that at the opening of the great war he had made new promises
to the Church, and we shall find the German bishops in 1941
complaining, while they still supported him, that he had not
fulfilled his promises! This persistence in looking to the man who
had plainly said years before in his book that he made his own
moral law -- "What is Necessary is Right" is the title of a chapter
of Mein Kampf -- is the key to this strange development. I say
strange because, even if we admit that the annexation of Austria
was inevitable, we should expect the Austrian Church to have met it
with quiet dignity instead of waving Swastika flag's and chanting
"Hell Hitler" like the treacherous scum of every country that
Hitler invaded.

     Whatever Hitler promised Cardinal Innitzer in their very
cordial interview he cheated with his usual fluency. At the moment
of writing this it is confidently reported -- and as confidently
denied, of course -- that Myron Taylor has taken to Washington 


                         Bank of Wisdon
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               6

                    HITLER DUPES THE VATICAN

certain terms of peace, or certain new promises, which the Pope is
transmitting on behalf of the arch-liar of modern history. One
would have thought that by 1941, when the Pope had seen Hitler lie
and cheat so brazenly for eight years, he would have been ashamed
to produce any proposals from such a source. For within three
months of his pleasant and confiding talk with Hitler the cardinal
was a prisoner in his palace, and hundreds of his priests and monks
were in the hands of the police, generally on the usual disgraceful
charge. Swiss papers said that "50,000 Austrians have left the
church this quarter, and a further 50,000 are expected to quit in
the next quarter." The Church in Austria was, as a result of its
trust in Hitler, disestablished and reduced to the same pitiful
condition as the Church in Germany. It had helped Hitler to secure
one of his bloodless victories. It now bled.



                           Chapter II


                     THE APPROACH TO MUNICH


     Yet the Vatican had already begun to smooth the path of
Hitler's sordid ambition in another area of Europe: to undermine
the loyalty of a large part of Czecho-Slovakia. In a lecture which
I delivered in London in 1936 I predicted that when the conquest of
Spain was completed the Nazis would turn to Czecho-Slovakia. Many
of my audience in those day's of inglorious inactivity and
childlike trust smiled, but although the country was not marked out
for attack in Mein Kampf its fate, could easily be foreseen.
Hitler's original ambition to make one empire of all German-
speaking peoples, with the Ukraine for an additional granary, had
grown mightily when he saw the cowardice and folly of the
democracies, and Czecho-Slovakia stood like a second Gibraltar, a
natural and formidable land-fortress across the route to Russia,
the Balkans, and the East. It commanded the Danube, and it had
within its own frontiers a very virile people with considerable
resources.

     But while Hitler made bravery the supreme Nordic quality and
boasted in every speech of the irresistible might of the Reich, he
preferred to proceed wherever possible by deceit. Not Thor, but
Tocri, the cunning, is the head of the modern German pantheon. The
world to be dominated and exploited must be taken over piecemeal
and by ruse, guile, and corruption. Hitler had men, and especially
women, steadily corrupting France for him, and he imagined that the
tactless Ribbentrop, who had a stupid idea of the influence of the
aristocracy in England, was winning or duping that country for him.
In Austria he used the Church, as he had used it for what it was
Worth in Spain, and he used it in Czecho-Slovakia.

     The cutting-up of the old Austro-Hungarian Empire at
Versailles had been crude and cruel, but it is a lie originating in
Germany and quite generally accepted in Britain and America, that
the Sudeten provinces of Czecho-Slovakia had then been detached
from Austria and tacked on to Bohemia. Any map that was published
before 1919 will show that these provinces are part of ancient 

                         Bank of Wisdon
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               7

                    HITLER DUPES THE VATICAN

Bohemia, which before the Catholic troops so mercilessly trampled
on it in the Thirty Years War was the most promising of the smaller
civilizations of Europe. Its sturdy people were instinctively anti-
Papal and had raised the banner of Hus before Luther was born. In
its exhausted condition it had been taken over by Austria and had
been made compulsorily Catholic in the customary way.

     It was still under Austria when the industrial development of
the nineteenth century began and its splendid natural resources now
gave promise of wealth. The mineral resources were in the
mountainous fringe, nearest to Austria, which became familiar to us
as the Sudeten province -- taking their name from the mountains --
and Austria, the dominant power, followed the policy which England
had once followed in Ireland. Austrian and German capital and
enterprise, using Czech labor, were to reap the profit. The Czechs
were to remain the hewers of wood and drawers of water for the
Viennese capitalist. It was in this way that the border provinces
had been filled with a German-speaking Catholic population.

     Until Nazism began its insidious propaganda in the countries
which it meant to annex these Catholics of Austrian (and partly
German) descent had lived quite amiably with the Czechs. The
country as a whole was Catholic. I have pointed out how the
reckless propaganda of recent years has in this respect run to a
most absurd extreme. For several years our annuals and other
reference-books have -- see the World Almanac, for instance -- said
that the population of Czecho-Slovakia is 10,500,000 and then that
it contains 16,831,636 Roman Catholics (besides 1,129,758
Protestants, 1,173,479 members of other religions, and 854,636 of
no religion)! Catholic statistics exhibit many miracles but this is
the choicest. If the last figure is changed into something more
than 2,000,000 -- for 854,636 is the number of those who boldly
wrote on the census-paper that they had no religion -- it will be
seen that Catholics really numbered about 8,000,000 in a total
population of about 14,000,000, and half these Catholics were
illiterate peasants and woodcutters.

     Here you will begin to understand the action of the Black
International in working for the destruction of Czecho-Slovakia.
The creation of that republic -- or the establishment of it, for it
had already declared itself an independent republic -- by
Versailles was followed by internal developments which, year after
year, caused consternation at the Vatican. Bordering on Russia the
country was bound to feel in a high degree the wave of Communist
and anti-religious propaganda which disturbed the Church
everywhere, but there was an even worse danger, from the Roman
point of view, in Czecho-Slovakia.

     The reaction against Austria, which in spite of its fame for
the amiability of its character had a grim record of tyranny, on
the part of both Church and state, in Bohemia, there was a
remarkable revolt against the Vatican. Almost at once (1920) a very
large body of the priests and their people cut their connection
with Rome and founded a national (Catholic) Czechoslovak Church.
The very orthodox Irish Independent (August 13, 1938) said that
"nearly a million people and 200 priests left the Church" in 1919
and 1920, that at the date of writing there was a painful shortage 


                         Bank of Wisdon
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               8

                    HITLER DUPES THE VATICAN

of priests in Bohemia and Moravia, and that a large part of the
acting priests were of peasant extraction and of a low cultural and
intellectual quality. The leading British Catholic weekly the
Tablet (organ of the richer and better-educated Catholics) went
further. In its issue of October 31, 1936 it had an article on
religion in Czecho-Slovakia by a Catholic who had recently
travelled in it. He had asked a priest about the report of
secessions, and the priest had said:

     "It is true, up to 1930 nearly 1,900,000 left the Church and,
while about 150,000 joined the Protestant and Orthodox communities,
the rest are without religion."

     The Roman priests so hated their brethren who remained
Catholic but threw off the yoke of the Vatican that this man lies
in the latter part of his statement. At the census of 1930 the
National Church of anti-Papal Catholics still had 793,385 members,
though even more declared that they had no religion. In fact, there
is no other country in the world in which nearly a million folk
made this formal declaration in the census-paper.

     This situation is the key to Papal policy in Czecho-Slovakia
and, as Catholic writers try to defend the Vatican by asking what
interest the Church had in helping Hitler in that country, it has
to be thoroughly understood. There were nearly a million Catholics
who refused to recognize the Pope; and the Vatican considers these
"ichismaties" as dangerous and damned as atheists. There were more
than 3,000,000 Socialists and Communists, since they had polled
1,700,000 votes at the last election, and there was the most
powerful Rationalist body in the world. Catholic writers boast that
in 1934 a great Catholic Congress was held at Prague and attended
by 50,000 Catholics. They do not mention that in 1935 the
Freethinkers held a Congress there and it was attended by 40,000
members. President Masaryk, the idol of the country and the most
respected statesman in Europe, and several of the political and
most of the cultural leaders, including the internationally famous
novelist Karl Capek, were Freethinkers. In no other country in the
world had the Church of Rome lost in ten years so high a proportion
of its members; and the loss continued yearly. Bohemia, the care of
the Republic, the center of culture and prosperity, was lost to
Rome. A Thirlmere travelling in the country after 1930 would have
said, "The Church knows that she is doomed."

     As the government was deservedly popular and secured for the
people a high and increasing prosperity there was no opportunity
here of repeating the Spanish tragedy. The only feasible plan from
the Vatican angle was to save the Sudeten Catholics at one end of
the Republic and the very backward Slovak Catholics at the other
from what Rome called the corrupting influence of Prague. This
coincided with Hitler's policy, though we may admit that the
Vatican did not foresee -- very few people foresaw -- that when
Hitler got these detached on the plea of the self-determination of
peoples and found the French and British so cowardly he would grab
the lot and have a magnificent starting-point for his further
advance. But we shall see that the Church was more active than ever
in the second and greater grab.



                         Bank of Wisdon
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               9

                    HITLER DUPES THE VATICAN

     This general coincidence of the interests of the Vatican with
those of the Nazis is supported by undisputed evidence of
cooperation. The Catholic writer in the Irish Independent whom I
have quoted admitted that the priests interfered in polities,
though in the Sudeten provinces the work was left to the laity. The
priests were less ready than those of Austria to be drawn into the
Nazi spider's web, especially when the Austrian Church began to
suffer like the German, but Nazism spread amongst the laity in
virtue of skilful German propaganda, and a local leader was found
in the Catholic Henlein: the kind of puppet that the Germans liked
to find -- a man of poor intelligence and greatly flattered by
being recognized in Berlin and promised's high position in the
Sudeten provinces when they were "liberated," Henlein and his
colleagues assured their fellow-Catholics that the Church had
nothing to fear from Nazi rule. He had that promise from Hitler. In
Germany, they said (quite falsely), Cardinal Faulhaber had provoked
the Nazi government by his attacks on it. They would not do that in
Sudetenland and would not be molested.

     To the general public in America, to whom the word Slovak
meant little more than the name of a tribe in Abyssinia, the whole
question turned on the Sudeten provinces. To Hitler these were only
the pretext of intervention, and a pretext in regard to which, by
promoting a little friction and getting Goebbels to represent this
as resentment of a bloody tyranny of the Czechs, he could make out
something of a case. But shearing off this narrow fringe of German-
speaking towns, which lay outside the Czech "Maginot Line," would
not give him Czecho-Slovakia, so the anti-Czech agitation at the
other end of the Republic, in Slovakia, was far more important.
This was overwhelmingly the work of the Black International.

     The core of the Republic was, as I said, Bolemia or Bohemia
and Moravia, which worked together and reached a high degree of
culture and prosperity. The Czechs who inhabited them were as able
and vigorous as the urban populations of Germany, and, fearing that
the Nazi wolf would sooner or later quarrel with them, they had a
fine army and at Skoda one of the greatest armament-making works in
Europe. But beyond Moravia, to the east, the country ran on to the
Carpathian Mountains, and from its geographical conditions this
large province remained very backward. This was the land of the
Slovaks, and beyond it the country terminated in a still more
backward mountainous area with a Ruthenian or Ukrainian population.
The Czechs might have done well to hand the latter to the
Ukrainians and let Soviet Russia civilize it as it had done with so
many border provinces.

     Czechs, Slovaks, and Ruthenians had declared themselves an
independent republic in 1918, when Austria collapsed, and
Versailles had confirmed their position. It was a lively team to
drive, including 6,000,000 Czechs, 3,000,000 Slovaks, 3,000,000
Germans, and more than a million Magyars and Ruthenians, but as
long as President Masaryk held the rein's and pre-nazi Germany was
friendly the republic made remarkable progress. Its social and
cultural achievements must be read elsewhere. In a land of powerful
minorities there are always men who thrust themselves into the
limelight by shrieking that the ancient culture of a particular
minority is in danger of perishing and they must demand autonomy. 


                         Bank of Wisdon
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               10

                    HITLER DUPES THE VATICAN

They are blind to the changed conditions of a world in which small
national units only excite the cupidity of more powerful neighbors.
The clash, however, only found expression in the melodramatic
fights of politicians until the, Nazis took up the grievances of
the Sudeten Germans and the disintegration of the Church alarmed
the Vatican.

     The priests in Slovakia had long been associated with the
patriotic movement in that province. The parallel with the
situation in Ireland before it was granted Home Rule is close
enough to enable anybody to understand. In Slovakia, however, the
patriotic party was actually led by a priest, Father Hlinka, and
was directly associated with Pacelli's policy. It is quite useless
to talk about patriotic priests and the carefulness of the Vatican
to avoid politic's, when the most sensational event of the year
1933 in Czecho-Slovakia was that the Papal Nuncio was expelled for
just such interference. He had supported the Slovak claims in a
letter which was published on August 13, 1933. We shall see later
how the French in their own interest -- disguised, of course, as a
noble effort to secure peace -- replied to the summons of the
Vatican to help it against the government of Czecho-Slovakia, but
the months of agitation over the expulsion of the Nuncio for
political reasons and the great Catholic demonstration that
followed in 1934 plainly identified the Vatican with the priest-
controlled Slovak movement. In any case we are studying the action
of the Black International and need not trouble always to detect
the Roman strings that work the clerical puppets.

     This clerical Slovak movement led in the end to the utter ruin
of Czecho-Slovakia. This was after Munich, and we need not go fully
into the events which led up to that ignoble surrender. The year
1938 opened with a fair degree of tranquillity in the Republic.
There had been scandals and a serious split in the Sudeten body,
and the coalition government was willing to make reasonable
concessions to the Slovaks. They were represented by two parties in
Prague, the Slovak Catholic party and the Slovak Centralists. The
capital of the province, Bratislava, was a solid city sharing the
culture of Prague, and large numbers of its citizens were opposed
to the political priests and their hordes of ignorant peasants, and
wild-eyed mountaineers. An amiable settlement seemed possible, but
this Suited neither the ghouls of Berlin nor those of the Vatican.
Hitler in February began the series of violent attacks on the
Czecho-Slovak government, then headed by Benes, which were to
prepare the German people for the opening of his aggressive
campaign.

     He was still within the framework of Mein Kampf, concerned
only, he said, about the condition of German's outside as well as
inside the Reich. There were 10,000,000 of them he said, living
under oppression in Austria and the Sudeten provinces. We saw how
he went on to annex Austria, and Benes easily proved that there was
no persecution of Germans in Czecho-Slovakia. But Hitler's
extraordinary success, thanks to the Church and the cowardice of
the democracies in taking Austria without striking a blow most
gravely confirmed him in his plan to take Czecho-Slovakia and
broaden his base for a European war.



                         Bank of Wisdon
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               11

                    HITLER DUPES THE VATICAN

     The Slovak Clerical withdrew their support of Benes and began
to press for autonomy, and the Sudeten Catholics again raised their
clamor. It was at this stage (March 14) that France and Russia gave
an assurance of assistance to the Czechs in case they were
attacked. Great Britain gave no pledge. The French later said that
they relied on the cooperation of Britain in virtue of their treaty
of mutual defence but this did not contemplate the eventuality of
France provoking an German attack by going to the aid of a third
power. The sound criticism of Britain at this stage is that its
statesmen could not shake themselves free of their blind anti-
Socialist zeal and see that the Axis had opened a career of
aggression. A combination in 1938 of the British and French fleets
and the armies of France, Russia, and Czecho-Slovakia might have
spared the world the horrors of the great war. At all events the
leading French paper, Le Temps, announced that the government had
given the Czechs an assurance of help, and the Russian press told
of a similar assurance from their side; an assurance that, unlike
the French, they have always acknowledged and were ready to honor.

     Germany at the same date, the middle of May, made one of its
solemn and nauseously hypocritical announcements to the world to
the effect that it had no designs on Czecho-Slovakia and only
wanted justice for the 3,000,000 Germans who lived in it. A month
later Henlein went to see Hitler in Germany, and at Carlsbad, on
German soil, he formulated the demands of the Sudetens. They had,
of course, grown remarkably larger since his interview with Hitler,
but this is not the place to repeat in detail the course of events
up to Munich. The darkest tragedy was that occupation of the whole
country which was never contemplated at Munich, and this is the
tragedy for which the Black International was plainly responsible.

     Throughout the summer of 1938 the demands of the Sudeten
Catholics grew. The Czech government made concession after
concession, but Hitler did not want concessions. He wanted refusal
and an excuse to invade. When his troops began in the late summer
to concentrate in the direction of Czecho-Slovakia Britain sent
Lord Runciman to find the bases of a compromise. Runciman was one
of those who held that any development was better than an advance
of Socialism and all that he did was to persuade the Czechs to talk
nicely to the Nazi wolf and not think of provoking him. Mussolini
helped out his gangster-friend by publishing in his own paper in
Italy an open letter to Runciman which that apostle of peace
probably took seriously. He assured Runciman that he knew from
conversation with Hitler that he had no intention whatever of doing
more than liberate the Sudeten fringe with 3,000,000 Germans. It
was all part of the sordid plan, but there was still in England, or
in the ruling class, a belief that Mussolini was not as
unscrupulous as Hitler.

     So Chamberlain went to Berchtesgaden and to Munich and dragged
England into that policy of appeasement which will cost the world
an incalculable number of billions of dollars and millions of
lives, waste of precious wealth, and a load of suffering under
which the planet reels. Had I been capable of weeping I would have
wept at one picture of that ignoble time: Chamberlain stepping out
of his plane at Croydon on his return from Munich. His face naively
lit with a smile like that of a school-girl who has won an 


                         Bank of Wisdon
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               12

                    HITLER DUPES THE VATICAN

unexpected prize, he flourished a scrap of paper before the crowd
and explained that he had Hitler's signature to a promise to keep
the agreement and not further menace the peace of Europe! The
interests of the Conservative Party had required that the fate of
an Empire Should be entrusted to such a man, and he had had
plenipotentiary power at Munich. He had at least the grace to die
when he saw the sequel. The pious Halifax still represents the
British Empire.

     Another picture comes to hand. A journalist who was present at
Munich, William L. Shirer, has just published his impressions
(Berlin Diary). He describes Hitler walking past him on that
fateful day:

     "It was a very curious walk indeed. In the first place it was
very ladylike. Dainty little steps. In the second place every few
steps he cocked his right shoulder nervously, his left leg snapping
up a he did so. I watched him closely as he came back past us. The
same nervous tic. He had ugly black patches under his eyes. He was
in a blue funk. If Britain and France had called his bluff there
might have been no world-war. At least it would have been fought
under very different conditions. And amongst the shower of
congratulations to Chamberlain on his miserable surrender was a
telegram from Cardinal Hinsley in the name of "the Catholic
archbishops and bishops of England."



                           Chapter III


                  THE MURDER OF CZECHOSLOVAKIA


     The Munich agreement was that Germany was to have those towns
and districts on the fringe of Czecho-Slovakia in which there was
a German majority. The self-determination of peoples is an
admirable principle, but in application it needs to be watched
carefully. If either priests or statesmen or, as in the case of
Italy and Germany, both demand a full birth rate of their people so
that the over-crowded population will ooze over the frontiers into
neighboring countries and multiply there until they become the
majority, as Mexicans might in parts of the southern States and
Japanese in parts of the eastern, they have no right whatever to
either autonomy or special privileges. A member of Wilson's staff
at Versailles told me how that statesman, baited and exhausted by
the French, clinging to his ideal of self-determination and dazed
by, names of Hungarian, Bulgarian, Polish, etc., towns about which
he knew nothing, was dragged into the blunders of that fateful
treaty. Over-population, deliberately encouraged, was one of the
chief pretexts -- it was in this case not true -- used by the arch-
criminals to reconcile their own people to the idea of aggressive
war and to secure the sympathy of muddle-headed humanitarians of
the George Lansbury type abroad. Lebensraum ("space to live in")
for the noble German people was the cry -- until the time came when
the mask could be abandoned and it was changed to Grossraum, which
practically means Empire.


                         Bank of Wisdon
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               13

                    HITLER DUPES THE VATICAN

     Since this encouragement of the birth rate was the second
chief point -- the first was the suppression of freedom or
glorification of authority -- on which the policy of the Vatican
coincided with that of the Axis we shall have to consider it later.
At this stage it thrusts itself upon our notice because it explains
why about one-fifth of the total population of Czech-Slovakia was
found in the relatively small area of the Sudeten provinces and
another fifth in the very backward conditions of Slovakia. The
Czechs of the large and progressive central region were fully in
line with modern civilization and controlled their birth rate. It
was this prosperous central region that Hitler coveted, for he had
now, ind seeing the inertia of the western democracies, gone far
beyond his original idea of uniting all peoples of Germanic blood
in a powerful empire and securing the Ukraine as their granary. He
and Mussolini, who had lied to Runciman with all the glibness of
his type, proved this immediately by cynically ignoring the Munich
agreement and Chamberlain and robbing Czecho-Slovakia of its vital
defensive resources so that he could take it over when the time was
ripe.

     The essential evil of the surrender at Munich was that in
practice it left to Hitler and Mussolini to settle what parts of
Czecho-Slovakia were to be handed over on the sacred principle of
self-determination. In theory this, and all questions arising from
the settlement, were to be decided by representatives of the four
powers. Russia was, of course, ignored as a low-caste nation which
could not expect to sit at table with pure-blooded Nordics" and the
descendants of the Caesars; and Britain and France further
stultified themselves by agreeing to this. They very quickly found
that they had betrayed Czecho-Slovakia and, as it proved before
long, the cause of civilization. Hitler's military draftsmen
included in the territory to be ceded the powerful fortifications
and big guns and, as they saw Chamberlain still playing with his
"Scrap of paper", robbed the country of its equipment, air-force,
military resources, and chief industrial enterprises. Catholic
Poland and Hungary seized their opportunity and, like dogs
attacking a mortally wounded deer, tore pieces out of the flanks of
the distressed country, with the cordial approval of their priests.
One of the most sturdy democracies in Europe, with a large and
splendidly equipped army, a great arsenal, and an eagerness to
cooperate with Russia, was disarmed.

     But Hitler hesitated for months to take over the helpless
country. One of the foulest features of this modern imperialism as
compared with its historical predecessors is that, while it mouthed
about the tonic of war and its invincible legions, it
hypocritically denied until the last moment that it had any
imperialist ambitions and covered every move it made with a ragged
mantle of respectable pretensions and mendacious pretexts of law
and order. In this (in Austria, Abyssinia, and Spain) it had had
the close cooperation of the Black International; the 'moral' force
which professed to have the task of exposing all such immoral
conduct in every part of the world. Hitler now found a still more
useful ally in the Black International.





                         Bank of Wisdon
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               14

                    HITLER DUPES THE VATICAN

     Pacelli was crowned Pope on March 12, 1939. This was, as I
said, the day on which the Jews were, with terrible loss and 
suffering (which he never condemned), expelled from Italy. It was
also the day on which Hitler sent a German plane to Slovakia to
bring to Berlin the Slovak priest who was to sell Czecho-Slovakia
to him for thirty pieces of silver.

     One reads in the biography of the new Pope by Ransom that
during the week after his coronation Pacelli was so beset with
problems that he gave only three hours to sleep every night. What
the problems were we do not know, but the problem that was then
agitating the whole civilized world, the problem on the solution of
which the peace of the world depended in the opinion of all
thoughtful men, was not one of them. Ransom devotes 100 pages of
his little book to the work of the overburdened Pope that year, but
he never mentions Czecho-Slovakia, though it was upon the conduct
of a priest, a prelate (or monsignore) of the Church, a man in a
position of particular interest to the Vatican, that the world-
crisis mainly depended. It, indeed, depended so vitally that three
days after the Pope's coronation statesmen concluded that a
European war was inevitable. Stalin began that intensive armament
of his people for which the world is now profoundly grateful.
Britain -- it has since transpired -- began its organization to
meet a German attack, drafted the scheme of several costly war-
ministers, ordered hundreds of thousands of card-board coffins for
the victims of air-raids and vast hospital spice, and even began in
a quite gentlemanly way to create a war-industry.

     Slovakia, with its almost illiterate priest-ridden population
was, as I said, the weakness of the Czecho-Slovak combination, and
now that Bohemia had lost a third of its industries and two-thirds
of its coal-mines, this poorer province had risen in importance.
Since Benes had had to fly for his life before the fury of Hitler
a blight - in large part a clerical blight -- had fallen upon the
unfortunate land. Hacha had been appointed President and he
surrounded himself with priests and Catholic politicians. Democracy
was already dead. On February 10, 1941, the New York Times quoted
this passage from the leading Czech Catholic paper.

     "There is no Catholic in Europe who would shed a tear to see
the collapse of democratic political disorder and who would not
sincerely welcome the fall of economic Liberalism, which has been
denounced by the Pope's Leading ideologist because it misuses the
working people in favor of a few capitalistic exploiters."

     The Pope's leading ideologist in America had been engaged for
twenty years in assuring the public that the democratic
institutions and economic forms at which the writer jeers are not
merely in accord with the teaching of the Church but had actually
been inspired by the great moral theologians centuries ago. We will
consider some time the encyclical of Pius XI, one of the first
fruits of Pacelli's guidance, on which this Catholic Fascism was
based. It is enough here that, though the above passage was written
two years after the disaster of 1939, the change from the fine old
Cultural order inspired by Masaryk began in 1939.




                         Bank of Wisdon
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               15

                    HITLER DUPES THE VATICAN

     Hacha and his colleagues at least realized that it was vital
to keep the three national elements of the State -- Bohemia-Moravia
Slovakia, and Ruthenia -- together, and the priest, Father Hlinka
who was the oracle and leader of the Catholic Slovaks, agreed. They
wanted, in order to protect their faith from the decay which it
suffered amongst the Czechs, some sort of autonomy or Home Rule
while remaining within the national unity. But Hlinka, the mediocre
kind of political priest which such a country would produce, though
an honest man, died in August (1938), urging his followers and his
successor with his last breath to cling to the union. This
successor, Msgr. Tiszo, who became well-known in the world-press in
1939 and 1940, was the second Quisling -- the Catholic Seyss-
Inquart of Austria being the first -- in the long line of Papalist
traitors who have served the Axis during the last three years; and
he was a priest, in fact a monsignore -- a rank between a priest
and a bishop in the Roman Church -- not a Catholic layman whose
action might be repudiated, when this was desirable,"by the Black
International.

     Tiszo was the son of a Slovak peasant who had been taken up by
the Magyar bishop of the district and educated for the priest-hood
in Hungarian colleges. At that time, tinder the old Austro-
Hungarian Empire, Slovakia was under the control of the Magyars.
Whatever may be the truth about his morals -- Catholic parents made
serious charges against him in connection with a girls' college in
which he taught for a time -- he identified himself very zealously
with the interests of the Hungarians until their yoke was rejected
by the Slovaks in 1918. He then became a patriotic Slovak and in
time attached himself to Hlinka. The Czechs accused the clerical
epicure -- at least he was far from ascetic -- of chronic political
duplicity, and he certainly duped Hlinka. He succeeded to the
Slovak leadership and became Premier of the autonomous province,
and he proceeded to stir up a dangerous demand for separation and
independence. Hitler wanted disorder in Czecho-Slovakia, the usual
hypocritical pretext for taking it over. Tiszo provided it.

     Hitler knew that he was at last regarded with suspicion and
that Russia, if not the western democracies, was very industriously
arming, but he still had faith in their dread of war and their
willingness to accept any sort of plausible excuse for his actions.
His agents got into touch with Tiszo and the plot was concocted.
Since the establishment of a virtually Catholic government at
Prague Slovak grievances had relented. Tiszo raised the cry of
independence and assured his followers that Hitler would prevent
Prague from interfering with them. The news reached Prague, and
Hacha deposed Tiszo from the Premiership and dissolved his cabinet.
Tiszo, as Premier, had taken an oath to observe the Constitution,
but such oaths were always open to interpretation by a skilful
theologian. It was rumored that March 15 (1939) was fixed as the
date of the declaration of Independence.

     Prague sternly resisted, and in the intense agitation of the
country there was certainly some disorder. Tiszo appealed to Hitler
and, as I said, a plane was sent to bring him to Germany. There is
an impartial summary of the events in Keesing's Contemporary
Archives (March 18) in which these details may be read. Seyss-
Inquart, the Catholic model of the Quislings, is said to have been 


                         Bank of Wisdon
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               16

                    HITLER DUPES THE VATICAN

sent in the plane to fetch Tiszo to Berlin, where he saw Hitler and
Ribbentrop, while the controlled German press groaned with stories
of outrages by the Czechs, as it would presently groan with charges
against the Poles. Tiszo telephoned from Berlin to his friends that
Hitler promised to support them in a declaration of independence,
and the sordid story entered upon its last chapter. The wolf began
his complaints that the Czech lamb was muddying the water for him.

     Hitler, with that air of a Persian monarch which he had now
developed, summoned Hacha to Berlin; and, with their usual felicity
of coincidence, the Catholic Hungarian government, which was
equally docile to Hitler and to the Pope, demanded that the Czechs
should give up Ruthenia. Hacha was received with military horrors
at Berlin at one in the morning, and four hours later (March 15)
Hitler ordered his troops to take over Bohemia and Moravia if Hacha
did not sign away the independence of his country. He would, he
said, if Hacha refused, order 700 bombing planes to raze the noble
city of Prague to the ground. The story of greed and treachery was
over. With pathetic gloom the New York Times announced "the
twilight of liberty in Central Europe." The world-press except the
Italian, which exulted, expressed the gravest anxiety about the
future and had no illusion about the Protectorates which Hitler
made of the three sections of the old Republic.

     What did the Vatican think of it? The murder of Czecho-
Slovakia was a worse crime than the conquest of Spain or the
annexation of Austria. It was not a question of taking sides in a
civil war or of extending the German flag to a German-speaking
people. It was worse than greed, the seizure of the wealth and
resources of Czecho-Slovakia. Careful observers saw it as the first
step in the enslavement of alien peoples in the service of Germany,
the first move in a European war. But the Pope said nothing . . .
Yes, to be sure, he continued to tell the world that peace is a
very beautiful, desirable thing and war is hideous. How any
Catholic of normal mentality can imagine that these utterances of
the Pope taught the world something which it did not know or did
not vividly appreciate one cannot understand; still less how this
message of peace every Easter and Christmas was consistent with the
summons to the world during the rest of the year to make a bloody
end of Socialism in Russia and Mexico. Was it necessary for the
Pope to use the word "bloody"? No one even suggests any other
meaning of his words.

     To Roman Catholics I am a pariah, a man beyond redemption, a
writer whose corrupt gospel must not be mentioned in the press, yet
I have seen and denounced the drift of the world for the last six
or seven years. The only moralist who has any place in modern life
is the man who does not merely tell it that there is a law of
justice and that peace is precious, but points out which actions
are unjust or effectively threaten the peace of nations. That is
just what Pacelli-Pius has never done. Here was an appalling crime,
the shadow of worse things to come, perpetrated in the very first
year of his pontificate and he was dumb. A body of Catholics
muttering "the Pope of Peace" is on exactly the same psychological
level as a crowd of Nazis in the Sports-palast chanting "Heil
Hitler" or of Fascists chanting "Mussolini Solo": the psychological
level of the performing dog.


                         Bank of Wisdon
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               17

                    HITLER DUPES THE VATICAN

     Ought we to go further and say that the Pope did not condemn
what happened in Czecho-Slovakia because he cooperated in it by
instructions to the Black International of the Sudeten, provinces,
Prague, and Slovakia? It is one of those points which I leave open,
and the reader must please himself. But in the name of common-sense
let no Catholic suggest that the Pope was so busy, or happenings in
Czecho-Slovakia were so remote and obscure, that little attention
was paid to them at the Vatican.

     There was during the few years before the war a persistent
rumor in London that the government defied the warnings of its own
Foreign Office. However that may be, there was no such friction
after Munich. After the outbreak of war the Times had indication's
every week of plans that had begun to take shape immediately after
Hitler and Mussolini had cynically violated their Munich agreement.
There were plans of new and vast aviation-works; rich mansions and
hotels, colleges in the country were put under contract to take
government departments when war broke out; a body of leading
journalists had a secret consultation with the government. But
these things are now well known. Any statesman who did not see
spurts of blue flame and jets of sulphurous smoke issuing from the
pit after the gross violation of the Munich agreement . . . But
there was no such statesman. Did those things escape the notice of
that wonderful intelligence-service of the Vatican City and the
eagle eye of the new Pope?

     To say so would, in view of the terrible specter that rose on
the horizon, be ludicrous even if Czech-Slovakia were at the other
side of the world. But the question's that arose in Czecho-Slovakia
were just of the kind that calls for ecclesiastical intervention.
The Vatican has, besides its Secretariat of State, a number of
"congregations", with large staffs, which correspond to the
departments (trade, education, etc.) of ordinary countries. To
these congregation's questions from all parts of the Catholic world
are not only permitted. They are encouraged, for the business helps
to maintain the Pope's vast revenue and the swarm of Italian
clerical parasites who fatten in Rome. Some of them must have had
a busy correspondence with Czecho-Slovakia since 1918, when the
reaction against Austrian tyranny and the scrularization of the new
state started the disintegration of the Church. As I have said, it
lost at least a fourth of its members in ten years. But the
paramount questions were political, especially the question whether
the solid Catholicism of the Sudetens and the Slovaks should be
saved from the influence of the anti-Papal government at Prague by
securing autonomy or, in the last stage, separation. I will tell
presently how the Pope's Nuncio (ambassador) at Prague was expelled
-- an extra-ordinary occurrence in a Catholic country -- for
publicly supporting the political demands of the Slovaks. Was
Pacelli, a thorough student of German affairs, likely to take
little notice of these affairs which in any case supremely
concerned the Secretariat of State?

     Beyond question the Vatican was following the course of events
with the closest attention, and it would be ridiculous to suppose
such priests as Hlinka and Tiszo were not in complete accord with
their higher ecclesiastical authorities and through these with the
Vatican. The action of the Nuncio sufficiently proves this. Some 


                         Bank of Wisdon
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               18

                    HITLER DUPES THE VATICAN

day, when the great-hearted Czechs are restored by the civilization
which betrayed them the full truth will be known. Meantime I
venture upon this suggestion of Vatican policy. It was uncertain on
the question of the Sudeten Catholics and as in the early days of
Sinn Fein in Ireland, left the business to laymen. It was far from
clear whether it would be a gain or a loss to transfer a couple of
million Catholics, who were entirely free to have their Catholic
institutions and schools under the Czechs, to Nazi control. It
would please Hitler, but what was the worth of his promises? In
regard to Slovakia the policy was clear. The dense mass of ignorant
or illiterate or semi-literate Catholicism must be protected from
Czech culture and progress by autonomy or, when this coincided with
Hitler's policy, separation. But whatever one may think of this
speculation the main fact does not share its uncertainty. The Black
International vitally helped Hitler in taking the final preparatory
step for his crime against civilization.



                           Chapter IV


                 WHY FRANCE BETRAYED THE CZECHS


     In one of his most important and most carefully prepared
speeches, a vast American as well as British and French public
listening on the radio or reading the printed word next day (August
25, 1941), Churchill deliberately described in these words the
relation of the French to the Czechs in 1938:

     "A French government deserted their faithful ally and broke a
plighted word in that ally's hour of need.

     Note carefully that this was not an attack on the miserable
group of Catholic weaklings which was called the Vichy government.
If it were, we might allow for strong feeling and over-emphasis.
But it was a cold and responsible Statement of what had happened in
the tragic days of Munich. At that time Britain and America were
cordial friends of France, and the betrayal was softened with vague
phrases or even, since the whole world was still steeped in calumny
against the great Soviet civilization, excused on the ground that
Russia could not be trusted. In war, as in wine, the truth comes
out. France basely deserted its ally. Why?

     Military considerations lie outside my many fields of interest
but it can safely be said that they afford no justification of the
action of France. Indeed now that we see the supreme French
commanders in their true light as priest-ridden mediocrities who
put the interest of their Church above the interests of their
nation and the dictates of honor we wonder if they did not strain
these military considerations in 1938 in order to avoid an
effective alliance with Russia which the Vatican, which sought an
alliance with Germany against Russia, would bitterly resent. There
is a fallacy in the plea that events have proved that and war at
that time against Germany would have been disastrous. Neither
France (always too selfish to tax itself sufficiently for adequate
defense) nor Russia had the forces they would later develop, but 

                         Bank of Wisdon
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               19

                    HITLER DUPES THE VATICAN

Germany also was far short of the power it would deploy in 1941
after being in a position for a year or two to enslave half of
Europe. The Maginot Line was complete. and the Czechs had, to the
great profit of the French Steel Trust -- a similar line, an army
limited in numbers, but of superb quality, and a stanch ally in
Russia. If Germany had turned the Maginot Line by invading Belgium
the British Fleet would be added to the coalition. The prospect was
more hopeful than in 1939 and 1940 or at any time until Russia was
drawn in.

     But can we suppose that France at any time before 1940 was
sensitive to the wishes and counsels of the Vatican? It was one of
the most irreligious countries in the world, or at least it ran
Britain close for that title. I have repeatedly quoted Catholic
admissions that only about six or seven million of its 42,000,000
people were in any real sense Catholics. All its statesmen were,
and had been for more than half a century, Freethinkers (except one
Protestant) and apart from artists and literary men, whose
convictions are not conviction's in an intellectual sense, nearly
all its cultural leaders were skeptics,

     We shall study France more closely in a later book when we
have to try to understand the monumental treachery of the Catholic
military leaders, but a few points must be discussed here in order
to complete the record of the action of the Black International in
preparing the world, whether it realized what it was doing or not,
for the historic crime of the war. In an earlier chapter I
mentioned, incidentally, how in 1937 Pacelli went -- we will not
say was sent for he made his own policy -- to Paris as the Pope's
legate. This was the first time the Papacy had sent a Legate to
France since 1814. All reference-books had continued to describe it
as a Catholic country, as they do today, and few thought of
explaining this very singular attitude of the Vatican to it. But we
will return to that latter. Pacelli, who hated democracy in general
and France in particular, was so very amiable and successful that
on the following New Year's Day the gifts received by the Premier
and the Minister of Finance, both Freethinkers, included Papal
decorations.

     Naturally this was not the beginning of pleasant relations,
but I must give a very summary account of events at this stage. The
Thirty Years' War (say 1884 to 1914) of France and the Vatican
ended in the truce of 1914-1918, when the close union of all
parties in France was demanded, and this led on to such amiable
relations after the war that the very powerful French Freethought
Party was never reconstructed.

     The new element was Alsace-Loran, two solidly Catholic
provinces which they had taken over from Germany. At first the
French tried to weaken the Church in them by applying their laws
(secularization of schools, marriage, etc.) to them but the Vatican
inspired a resentment that alarmed the government. The true state
of Alsace-Loran for years after 1918 was not described in the
American and British press. It seethed with rebellions feeling,
carefully fostered by its (in Alsace at least) German-speaking and
German-hearted priests. France, expecting a German war of revenge
sooner or later, was scared and had to call in the aid of the 


                         Bank of Wisdon
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               20

                    HITLER DUPES THE VATICAN

Vatican; and from the richly organized Catholic communities of
Alsace-Loran, the clerical zeal spread to north-eastern France.
There was, French Catholics admitted, no flood of conversions, but
the mere fact of the annexation had raised the Church in France
from a body of 5,000,000 to a body of about 7,000,000, and it was
of the highest political importance to be on good terms with the
Vatican.

     So the frivolous folk of Paris saw strange things which had,
they thought, been relegated to ancient history; exchange of
representatives at Paris and Rome, the canonization of Joan of Arc,
a Papal Legate embracing their very skeptical leaders, and so on.
In 1904 I had attended a huge International Congress of
Freethinkers at Paris and had on Sunday walked in a procession of
200,000 while the whole city seemed to cheer us. Twenty years later
I attended another Freethought Congress in Paris. No more than 200
attended the largest meetings, and the city did not take the
slightest interest. An aged ex-Minister who had been in the van of
the anti-clerical struggle form 1890 to 1910 told me that for
political reasons Freethought was dead and the Church very much
alive. I was not altogether surprised. Two years earlier I had been
in Athens, in fact in the British Legation there, when the Greek
foreign minister had come with the news of the terrible defeat of
the Greeks by the Turks. The French had been guilty of an act of
treachery of which the older France would have been incapable. It
had Supplied the Turks, the minister said, with guns, tanks, and
officers against the Greeks.

     Here I need consider only how the new policy affected the
relations of France with Czecho-Slovakia. The government had with
the support of the deputies from Alsace-Loran and in face of the
violent protests of the Radicals sent an ambassador to Rome and
received a Nuncio at Paris. When the Radicals were put in power in
1924 they tried to abolish this arrangement, but the clergy
defeated them again through the Catholic deputies of Alsace-Loran.
From that time the Pope's representative in Paris had considerable
influence and there were frequent deals with the Vatican. The
royalist movement, which was gaining ground and was mainly
Catholic, was repeatedly checked by the Church at the request of
the government. For the first time since Napoleon French Catholic
writers (royalists) made drastic attacks on Rome, accusing it of
traffic with the "blasphemous laicism" of the French government.
The government had to pay for the Church's services.

     One of the return services of the government concerned Czecho-
Slovakia. In 1933 the Papal Nuncio at Prague was, as I said,
expelled by the Czechs for political interference in publicly
supporting the Slovak movement. The Vatican retorted by organizing
a gorgeous festival at Prague in honor of the eleventh centenary of
some medieval saint who was supposed to have introduced
Christianity into the country, and the French were used to persuade
their allies, the Czechs, to take part and adjust the quarrel over
the Nuncio. The French Cardinal Verdier was one of the most
conspicuous figures in the ceremonies.





                         Bank of Wisdon
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               21

                    HITLER DUPES THE VATICAN

     In 1936 the French signed their pact with Soviet Russia. What
Pacelli, who began this year to call repeatedly for war on 
Bolshevism, thought about it one can imagine, but we may defer that
question. The Pact drew France, Russia, and Czecho-Slovakia into an
alliance which seemed to be of such importance for the security of
France and the peace of Europe that the feelings of the Church had
to be disregarded. But in creating all the bitterness that it could
against Russia by a false representation that it persecuted
religion the Church added considerably to the confusion which
distracted French attention from the urgent need to increase its
armament. French Communists reacted as one would expect, and the
royalists and Fascists derived new strength from the disorder.

     If we recall that the Church also had representatives of the
most fanatical loyalty in the highest military councils we begin to
understand that element of the perfidy of 1938 which concerns us
here. France was morbid and demoralized during several years before
the way, but we did not then imagine that its great soldiers were
convinced that lack of religion was the root of all its troubles
and that the authority of the Church must be reestablished at any
cost to the nation, even the sacrifice of that honor of which it
was so proud. The final word in 1938 when the Czechs called upon
the French to redeem their pledge, was with the Catholic heads of
the army and navy: Petain, Weygand, and Darlan. Is it a mere
coincidence that they refused to fight for Czecho-Slovakia, which
the Vatican was not interested in protecting, yet, without any
further large addition to their forces in the intervening year,
decided to fight for Poland, in which the Vatican was passionately
interested? Had Pacelli already the idea that a France so
humiliated and weakened that two priest-ridden old men could make
it fall upon its knees once more might be linked with Italy, Spain,
and Portugal in a bloc or League of Catholic powers? We do not
know.

     So the Czechs were sacrificed to the butchers under whom they
suffer so appallingly today. The French complain that Britain did
not support them.

     Britain was under no pledge to do so in a contingency of that
nature and had no army to speak of. But it would certainly have
been forced in by public opinion, and its fleet would have been a
powerful support. A British author who had exceptional sources of
information told me that the ships were stripped ready for war, as
they had also been during the German and Italian insolence in
Spain, and groans and curses followed the news of appeasement from
London. We were, relatively to Germany's resources, hardly better
prepared in 1939 than in 1938, and the cause in 1938 would have
been far more inspiring, while the aid of Russia was certain.

     Msgr. Tiszo returned from his treachery in Germany and took
over the petty Protectorate of Slovakia. He now showed his complete
dependence on Rome and Berchtesgaden. In the summer of 1929 he
drenched Bratislava, where many still cherished in secret the
culture of the Czechs, with Pacelli's anti-Bolshevism and vilified
the great memory of Masarvk. When Hitler hypocritically entered
upon a peace-compact with Russia Tiszo again changed his tune. He
sent his cousin as representative of Slovakia in Moscow and sent a 


                         Bank of Wisdon
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               22

                    HITLER DUPES THE VATICAN

telegram of congratulation to Stalin on his sixtieth birthday. Was
he fully aware (as Stalin was) that the whole pretence of German
friendship was one of those tricks by which the invincible legions;
tried to weaken their opponents in advance?

     He at all events strangled democracy and freedom on the lines
of the "great encyclical" of Pius XI. The Catholic Tablet (July 27,
1940) said that the Vatican Radio, announcing that the blear-eyed
Petain was going to "reconstruct France on a Christian basis" by
suppressing liberty and sacrificing prosperity, added with joy that
Tiszo had already done this in Czecho-Slovakia. Another section of
the earth won for Pacelli's grand plan of a league of theocratic-
Fascist states sworn to extinguish Socialism. But in all these
matters man proposes and Hitler disposes. Already it is announced
that Tiszo is under the frown of the Fuhrer, and it looks as if he
will join the disillusioned band of Quislings (Henlein, Seyss-
Inquart, etc.) who were to be lifted to power by the German giant.


                            Chapter V


                 ON THE EVE OF THE WORLD-TRAGEDY


     In the summer of 1938, between the tragedy of Munich and that
of Prague. Pacelli went to preside at the Eucharistic Congress at
Buda-Pesth. He was housed royally in the royal castle, and the
fleet-less Admiral Horthy had long and very cordial conversations
with him. Hungary is counted a Catholic country because 64.9 of its
population is described as Catholic. It is Fascist, but as the star
of Mussolini paled before that of Hitler, Horthy had linked the
fortune of the state he despotically controlled with that of
Germany. German armies could march through Hungary or use its
stretch of the Danube whenever they needed. It had been unjustly
treated at Versailles, and it looked to Hitler as it had earlier
looked to Mussolini, to recover for it a large and rich slice of
Yugo-Slavia. It was another of Hitler's bloodless victories and, as
he had the sense not to interfere with Hungary's Church or
institution's, the Papacy was content. It was one more Catholic
Fascist state for the grand alliance, and Czecho-Slovakia was
already doomed in the eyes of thoughtful observers.

     The year 1939 then opened with very grave anxiety in all
democratic lands. What would be the feeling of the Black
International outside those countries?

     You have only to turn back a few years and compare its feeling
at the time when, at the beginning of 1930, Pacelli virtually took
over the rule of the Church. Then the Church of Rome was
disintegrating more rapidly than ever before. The steady loss by
leakage until 1914 had been succeeded, as I showed, by a
catastrophic loss of between 50,000,000 and 100,000,000 in about
ten years. Russia, the principal source of the new corroding force,
had made good and was preparing to offer to the world something
which Rome had always declared impossible: a great civilization
built without the least religious inspiration, for no one questions


                         Bank of Wisdon
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               23

                    HITLER DUPES THE VATICAN

that the constructive class in Russia was entirely atheistic.
Without anything that could justly be called persecution of
religion this class had communicated its atheism to something like
100,000,000 people within its own frontiers, won tens of millions
in China and even French Indo-China and Siam, and crossed the
Pacific and devastated the Church from Mexico to Patagonia. The
same influence had pervaded Europe and had in Germany and the
southern half of the continent detached tens of millions of
Catholic's from the Church. I have given the figures and the
evidence.

     Such had been the situation and the outlook of the Church in
1929. In the ten years of Pacelli's tenure of office as Secretary
of State there had been a dramatic change. The triumphant spread of
Russian irreligion had been completely arrested, and that country
was isolated by a great wall of international hatred and slander.
Italy and Spain were again prostrate at the feet of the priests. We
will not say that it did not matter two pins to the Vatican whether
the men who went to church and sent their children to Catholic
schools once more were blessing or cursing the Church in their
hearts as long as they obeyed, but we may certainly say that it was
regarded by the Black International as a magnificent triumph that
the tens of millions of apostates dare not open their lips and that
their children were all handed over to the priest. Italy and Spain
were once more Catholic countries. Portugal and Hungary were in
line, and, while Germany, resisting both threats and blandishments,
was still a very unsatisfactory ally, it had at least destroyed the
Socialist-Communist force that had made havoc in the Church. The
proud anti-Papalism of Czecho-Slovakia was in the dust, and France
was on cordial terms with the Vatican. The rot (liberation?) had
been stopped in South America, which presented an almost unbroken
compulsory-Catholic front, and in the Far East the alliance with
Japan opened up a golden prospect of a Catholic monopoly of
missions in the one-fourth of the earth over which the flag of the
Rising Sun was expected to wave.

     That -- again I am just summarizing facts of which I have
given full evidence -- was the situation in the Spring of 1939 when
Pacelli reaped his reward and became Pope; and American Catholic
literature assures you that he piously hated limelight and desired
only to be an obscure parish priest moving amongst the obscure
poor! Our newspapers have today "experts on religion" as "Church
editors" just as they have political, financial, or international
experts. These men never enlarge on this most spectacular religious
development since the Reformation. In a single generation the
Church of Rome lost and regained at least one-third of its members.
These "experts on religion" would probably be startled and
incredulous if you told them that, though I have proved it line by
line. They are too busy talking nonsense about the Church in Russia
or describing parochial triumphs and quarrels.

     But why does not the Catholic journalist or orator dilate on
this dramatic development? In the first place because he does not
wish to call attention to or acknowledge the Stupendous losses of
the Church from 1919 to 1929, which he has always denied. He
prefers the miracle of the tail wagging the dog; the theory that
small minorities of wicked men somehow get power in spite of rich 


                         Bank of Wisdon
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               24

                    HITLER DUPES THE VATICAN

and formidable bodies of priests, all the conservative elements,
and the overwhelming majority of the nation! That explains Mexico
and South America, Vienna and Spain. Exact -- that is to say
truthful -- analysis is as rare in this field as decency is amongst
Nazis or Fascists.

     In the second place, and chiefly, he very certainly does not
want to draw attention to the fact that whatever losses the Church
sustained from 1919 to 1929 occurred in an atmosphere of free
discussion while the gains were won entirely by coercion and
violence. That sounds like one of those generalizations which
suppress exceptions and reserves for the sake of strength. It is
not. It is an accurate generalization of facts which we have now
seen and it requires no qualification whatever. The only apparent
exception is Russia, but the Church of Rome was always small in
that country so that its losses are a slender element in the total;
and it was more Polish than Russian and entirely pledged, as we
shall see, to the war against the Soviets, so that it suffered on
political grounds. In Mexico the losses preceded the application of
the laws (passed long before) which punished political activity on
the part of the clergy and do not make an exception to my general
statement. But the great losses, the losses in ten's of millions,
in Germany, Italy, Austria, Spain, Czecho-Slovakia, and South
America were the result of free discussion and the enlightenment of
the people.

     From 1929, when Mussolini made his infamous compact with the
Vatican, onward the area of free discussion has been steadily
reduced, and in each country in which freedom and democracy have
been replaced by the tyranny of Fascism the Church has recovered
ground. The only exception to this is Germany, and it is not an
exception in principle because, though the Church was not here in
alliance with violence this was only because its offer of alliance
was spurned. Let us understand clearly what happened. We are not
asked to believe that the 30,000,000 apostates of Spain and Italy,
for instance, have become once more Catholics in their conviction
and affections, any more than the 10,000,000 apostates under the
Vichy government have. They probably in their own minds curse the
Church more bitterly than ever. But all organizations and
literature which criticized the Church and told people the truth
about its history and its real aims were suppressed, and all
children were compelled to receive religious lessons and breathe a
Catholic atmosphere. The spread of the revolt was thus drastically
checked and the people were treated as Catholics and subjects of
Canon Law. The Church considered that it had recovered its ground.

     This recovery by coercion had to be affected in every case by
an alliance with the secular powers. The Church had never known any
other means of regaining lost masses except by alliance, for mutual
profit, with tyranny and violence, and it now found that, by an
extraordinary piece of good fortune for itself, the secular powers
which had formerly bludgeoned its rebels for it and seemed to have
lost forever the power to do so, recovered the use of the whip and
the firing squad. The Church's recovery in the last ten years does
not imply any genius in the person of its guide, Pacelli-Pius. The
reaction against Communism began long before he became Secretary of
State. He had only to link the Church with the powers of darkness 


                         Bank of Wisdon
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               25

                    HITLER DUPES THE VATICAN

which gathered strength in his time, and this was no new discovery
of ecclesiastical statesmanship. That is why in the preceding books
I have given a good deal of historical information. Without it you
cannot fully understand the contemporary situation.

     So the Black International pledged the Church to a policy of
violence and tyranny, since this was the only possible way in which
it could recover the ground it had lost. If there is one real
miracle about the Church of Rome it is the loyalty of the normal
educated Catholic layman to his clergy. Very large numbers of the
faithful are of the type that tells you that it "never reads the
paper's" but I am thinking of the men who read their daily and
discuss its contents just as you do. They read one year of Italy
passing under the combined rule of Fascism and the Church and the
violent suppression of all Socialist, Communist, Rationalist, and
any other literature that caters to non-Catholics. A few years
later it is South America, then Spain, then Austria, then Czecho-
Slovakia. During all these years they are reading books or articles
by Catholic writers who assure America that their Church is the
ideal champion of freedom and democracy, and they know that in
these countries where Church and Fascist authorities have combined
millions -- they could easily find that it is tens of millions --
of men and women have been robbed of the kind of freedom they
treasure most and bullied into conformity with what they regard as
false. They know this much at least, however much the press and
their priests conspire to conceal the imprisonment of tens of
thousands and the groans of tortured men in the jails. Does your
Catholic friend really agree with his priest that this complete
suppression of free discussion is necessary to guard the faith, and
that million's of sullen, reluctant, bitter-hearted folk driven
into submission by violence are a gain to it or to the World?

     There is another feature of this on which I have as yet made
no comment. The last ten years have witnessed not only the
appearance of a vast amount of tyranny, torture, and bloodshed, but
also a general degradation of character in which all sense of
honor, truthfulness, and manliness seems to have been lost.
Agreements between nations have become as cynical as they were in
the days of Caesar Borgia and Pope Leo X. More than fifty such
international agreements, treaties, pacts, etc., have been solemnly
signed and sealed in the last twenty years, and tossed aside like
broken toy's a few years later. Statesmen must now sign such pacts
in the spirit in which Roman augurs once winked at each other over
the altars. To deceive another state is a diplomatic ideal. No
means to gain the end of a state -- from castor-oil to opium, from
prostitution to castration -- is too foul to be used. Fluency in
lying is almost the first qualification for office; and the men who
talk most about honor are completely destitute of any sense of it.

     I would ask the reader to reflect here very carefully.
Certainly not the whole of civilization is thus degraded. Your
nation and mine -- America and Great Britain -- have many faults,
but we should justly resent the application of this description to
them. Today we may add Russia; and there are Sweden, Denmark,
Norway, Switzerland, Turkey, and many countries. In fact, is it not
the literal truth that it is only the allies of the Black 
 


                         Bank of Wisdon
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               26

                    HITLER DUPES THE VATICAN

International that have thus degraded and debauched the standard of
personal and collective life? Let the Catholic who finds a triumph
of his Church in the last ten years reflect on that. It is part of
the price that the Church has had to pay.

     And the greater price was still to come. Pacelli had, through
the local hierarchies at least, blessed war, in Spain, Abyssinia,
and Czecho-Slovakia. He was still in 1939 alternating between
beautiful praise of peace and demands of war upon Russia and
Mexico. We need not linger to wonder how far he realized what he
had done with his alliances, but all the world now knows it. He had
helped to set the stage for the vilest and bloodiest war in
history. He had helped and courted the three powers which were
pledged to launch this war, and for the most sordid greed that ever
moved an army. What did Pius XII and his Black International do
when the hellish bugles sounded and the black flag was unfurled?



                          ****     ****













    Reproducible Electronic Publishing can defeat censorship.



   The Bank of Wisdom is a collection of the most thoughtful,
scholarly and factual books. These computer books are reprints of
suppressed books and will cover American and world history; the
Biographies and writings of famous persons, and especially of our
nations Founding Fathers. They will include philosophy and
religion. all these subjects, and more, will be made available to
the public in electronic form, easily copied and distributed, so
that America can again become what its Founders intended --

                 The Free Market-Place of Ideas.

   The Bank of Wisdom is always looking for more of these old,
hidden, suppressed and forgotten books that contain needed facts
and information for today. If you have such books please contact
us, we need to give them back to America.


                          ****     ****




                         Bank of Wisdon
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               27




                        30 page printout

    Reproducible Electronic Publishing can defeat censorship.

          This file, its printout, or copies of either
          are to be copied and given away, but NOT sold.

          Bank of Wisdom, Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                          ****     ****

Edited by E. Haldeman-Julius

THE BLACK INTERNATIONAL              No. 6

                   THE WAR AND PAPAL INTRIGUE

                  HOW THE NEW POPE TALKED PEACE
                       AND WORKED FOR WAR

                  HALDEMAN-JULIUS PUBLICATIONS
                     GIRARD  -- : --  KANSAS


                          ****     ****

                             Chapter

  CHAPTER

     I    The Church Crowns the Papal Policy ................. 1

    II    The Pope's Peace Efforts ........................... 9

   III    Poland Pays for its Piety .......................... 17

    IV    The German Church and the War ...................... 25


                          ****     ****


               THE CHURCH CROWNS THE PAPAL POLICY


     At the close of the book on the monstrous perfidy of the Black
International in Czecho-Slovakia I asked: What did Pius XII, the
new Pope, and his local hierarchies do when the hellish bugles
sounded and the black flag was unfurled?

     In our day-to-day reading of the crowded events of our time,
under the changing strain of feelings which one day are warmed with
stories of heroism and next day are chilled with despair, we
naturally lose sight of whatever continuity there is in the
bewildering procession. We could not readily answer such questions
as this, although it refers to only two years ago. But I have
prepared the reader for the answer. The Black International has
pursued a consistent policy during the last ten years, to say
nothing of earlier times. It has fawned upon the three Powers which
had already by 1930 openly exhibited such shameless programs of
greed and barbaric violence that the war was inevitable. I have 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               1

                   THE WAR AND PAPAL INTRIGUE

proved that. So the answer to our question also is inevitable. The
Black International clung still to the arch-enemies of the human
race through all their crimes and atrocities as long as they had a
confident prosPect of victory.

     Will it change its policy when that prospect changes to one of
defeat and dire punishment? I write with the hum of war-planes
overhead, the slender fingers of the searchlights probing for the
enemy that would make a shuddering pulp of us. Round me are the
horrid gaps in the rows of little peaceful homes from which I have
seen the men -- the garbage-men of a "New Order" -- bring out the
shrouded, crumpled forms of the dead. In the press daily are the
rumble of a struggle in Russia that surpasses everything in the
calendar of human folly and perversity and the tremulous
foreshadowing of an agony that the winter may bring upon
200,000,000 broken-hearted folk. The end is not in sight, and I
have no gift of prophecy. But should, as I confidently expect, the
heroism of the Russian people hurl back the advancing wave of
savagery and give us an unwavering hope of victory the Papacy will
change its policy.

     Remember the last war. The Papacy supported Germany, which had
promised it the usual reward -- more power and wealth to the Church
-- even against Italy, but as soon as America entered the arena and
the defeat of Germany seemed probable, it recollected that the Pope
is the Great Neutral. The signs of change already flicker in the
press, but notice how feeble, how anonymous, how easily repudiated
they are as long as the terrific might of Germany still rears its
brutal head! Whatever be the next or the final phase, let the world
never forget how the Papacy helped its deadly and unscrupulous
enemies during the long years of corrupt preparation and supported
them during two years of shuddering criminality. The one virtue
which its best apologists claim for it that it preached the virtues
of peace, did but help to dope the innocent nations while the
crooks armed themselves. At least from 1936 onward war was
inevitable because Japan, Germany, and Italy could attain the
objects to which they were openly pledged by no other means, and
they saw the rest of the world so beguiled with their pipe-dream of
peace that it seemed to them safe to open the insidious campaign.

     And in case the reader has become to some extent confused by
the mass of details and testimonies which it has been necessary to
give in support of this indictment let us sum up and formulate very
clearly the charges against the Black International. The intimate
connection of the Vatican by solemn agreements and the exchange of
ambassadors with Japan, Italy, and Germany and with such satellites
of theirs as Franco Spain, Vichy, Portugal, Hungary, etc., is a
fact of ordinary record. A desperate apologist might say that this
has no more significance than the diplomatic relations of other
neutral powers with those countries. The Catholic apologist is so
accustomed to writing for his own people, who are forbidden under
pain of hell to read criticisms of what he says, and treated with
such generosity in the general press that there is no limit to his
audacity. Listen to this. On the very day on which I write this I
receive a letter from a correspondent who tells me that a Catholic
to whom he spoke of the infamous agreement of Mussolini and the
Pope in 1929 denies that there ever was such a compact and that it 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               2

                   THE WAR AND PAPAL INTRIGUE

is just one of McCabe's lies! Can you beat that? The Concordat and
Treaty were editorially discussed in every paper in the world,
especially the Catholic papers, which hailed the agreement as a
superb triumph of Papal diplomacy, and it seems impossible that a
Catholic should not know that the Vatican City and all its
privileges (independence, radio, etc.) only began with and were
founded by that treaty.

     There is one fundamental difference between the position of
secular powers that exchange ambassadors and courtesies with the
Vatican and that of the Vatican itself: to say nothing of the fact
that these powers make no pretence of moral responsibility and
spiritual guidance of the world. They have not in Germany or Italy
a black army of 50,000 to 100,000 servants under their control --
bishops, priests, monks, nuns, religious brothers, organizers,
teachers, journalists, etc. -- which professes that it has to build
the character of the nation. The Vatican has. It is one of the
loudest boasts of the Church of Rome over its rivals that it is
international, its various national branches being entirely subject
to the Vatican, and that this gives it a unique power to judge
events from the universal moral, not the narrow national viewpoint.

     What, then, are the vices of this triumvirate of poisoning
nations which the Vatican ought, on its own profession, to have
denounced to the world instead of protecting them by friendly
alliance? It will be enough here to select three.

     The first is that the war for which they are responsible is
the most bestial in modern history because it is a war of naked
greed. Shires tells us in his Berlin Diary that he once said this,
in less blunt language, to the Nazi Economic Minister Funk, and the
man admitted that the aim of it was to secure "the maximum economic
opportunity" for Germany. Notoriously its aim is to concentrate
industrial production in Germany or to permit it in subject
countries, which are to provide food and raw material -- a much
less profitable service -- only under German control. Japan won
over the mass of its workers to the plans of its militarists and
capitalists by just the same bait. Even the leaders of the Social
Mass (Socialist) Party support the Chinese Incident. They say that
the British workers have a good status because the country seized
vast colonies overseas and exploits them. I should like to hear
them tell an Australian, Canadian, or South African that his
country is a "colony" and is exploited by Great Britain. In Italy
the original idea was the same. The chief argument of the
government during the Abyssinian War was that the country contained
at vast amount of undeveloped wealth which would raise the income
of every class in Italy. Today, it is true, they complain that the
word Axis is heard no longer, and that their German overlords
brutally tell them that the destiny of Italy is to be a playground
and kitchen-garden for Germans. But a share in the vast spoils of
the war was the lure that brought them into it.

     It is a much-disputed point whether all modern wars can be
brought under an economic formula. In the case of the present war
there is no dispute. Mussolini and Hitler may have medieval dreams
of conquest and empire, and the Japanese fanatics may talk about 



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               3

                   THE WAR AND PAPAL INTRIGUE

the divine mission of the Yamata race to uplift the world, but the
real motive is that the division of the earth into two spheres of
influence means incalculable wealth for Germany and Japan and huge
fortunes for their politicians, bankers, and industrialists.

     That is the war the Pope helped to bring on. It promised more
wealth and power to the Church. It meant the paralysis of
industrial development and its consequences -- education, urban
life, free discussion and the growth of Socialism and skepticism --
in the countries in which the Papacy had lost most heavily. Notice
what is happening in France. Petain makes no secret of his design
to destroy the old industrial life in the interest of the Church.
Even if you think a bunch of Italian clerics hardly capable of a
world-plot so subtle as this you have their cry, repeated for years
throughout the Church, for the destruction of Bolshevism and
Liberalism, the most prolific sources of rebellion against the
Papacy. Whichever way you take it the Black International has, for
its own profit, lent its aid in preparing the conditions of success
of the most sordid war of greed in modern history and has in each
country, through the local Church, boisterously supported every
step that Was taken in the direction of world-domination.

     The second general vice is that the ambition of these Powers
has led to a quite repulsive degradation of the standards of public
conduct. Here there is no possibility of pleading ignorance on the
part of the simple-minded Vatican. The Nazis have lied to and duped
the Papacy itself repeatedly since their first bargain with it in
1933, and four-fifths of its complaints about Germany and Italy are
grumbles that the Concordats which were solemnly signed have not
been observed. Even Japan is now beginning to give it serious
concern by its scheme to make Christianity purely national and
independent of foreign influence.

     Broadly we have seen years of such lying, treachery, and
corruption as we thought that we had buried forever. Nearly a
hundred pacts, treaties, or international agreements of one kind or
other have been signed in the last 20 years and cynically disowned
as soon as it was expedient. An Australian paper, The Vigilant,
sends me a copy of an issue in which it quotes Hitler's solemn
assurance of non-aggression to every country he has attacked or
annexed. "Germany neither intends nor wishes", he says in 1935, "to
interfere in the international affairs of Austria, to annex
Austria, or to conclude an Anschluss." His books show that he
wished and intended it long before that time. "The Sudetenland is
the last territorial claim I have to make in Europe," he said on
September 26, 1938. Within a few month's he took the whole of
Czecho-Slovakia and began to prepare for Poland. "Germany has
concluded a non-aggression pact with Poland and she will adhere to
it unconditionally", he had told Poland and Europe. So with
Holland, Belgium, and Yugo-Slavia. And all Germany Heil Hitlered
when on June 22, 1941, he said, with his usual ferocious solemnity:
"When the German Reich gives a guarantee, that means that it also
abides by it."

     It is not only that the leading statesmen of the aggressor
nations have lied so brazenly and cynically for years that the
problem of the future historian will not be their psychology but 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               4

                   THE WAR AND PAPAL INTRIGUE

that of the democratic statesmen. No trick has been too dirty to
use. The corruptor, or advance-agent, was considered as respectable
as the missionary. Japanese young "ladies" prostituted themselves
in the good cause in China and Mongolia, and in France dames of the
highest elegance used their charms for Germany and the Church.
Japanese and German gold corrupted even Russians. Buddhist monks
were used in Southern Asia, and women and promises of advancement
everywhere to provide the miserable brood of traitors, almost a
novelty of our age, whom we call Quislings. In short, the near-
success of the trinity in crime was won by as vast and
comprehensive a debasement of our standards of honor as had not
been known in Europe since those flowers of the Age of Faith -- the
Age of Chivalry and the Renaissance.

     Now not even a Bernard Shaw or an Aldous Huxley will say that
this foulness, this reversion to pre-civilized ways of living, is
found on all sides. Paradox is amusing but a paradox of that sort
would be revolting. Certainly we all have our faults. I write for
men and women who discount the utterances of statesmen and bishops
and do not see the present struggle as a Miltonian conflict of
angels and devils. We are poor enough, heaven knows, and much of
the motivation of our conduct even in this war is far from angelic.
But that this corruption of the standards of conduct is
overwhelmingly on one side will be generally recognized. It is on
the side of the Pope's allies; and it has done incalculable harm to
the democracies, for whom he has not a good word.

     And the third vice, closely connected with this, is the
bestiality with which the friends of the Vatican have conducted the
campaign to attain their bestial greeds. A war inspired by such a
purpose could not very well be otherwise. It is on the gangster
level. Fear of retaliation has restrained that use of poison-gas
which we expected but the horrors thicken as I write. We thought
that we had reached a stage when soldier's recognized the rights of
man and confined their killing within certain lines. Now some blond
beast in Paris or Prague, to get praise or higher profit from his
Fuhrer, shoots fifty entirely innocent men for the act of an
unknown. Bulgar officers bloodily exterminate whole villages.
Russian villagers are shut in their houses and burned alive. The
food of children is stolen in Denmark and Holland. Japanese
officers indulge themselves or their men in rape and force opium
upon the Chinese. Gestapo men, trained in Hitler Colleges to give
the rein to sadistic impulses . . . But you have read enough about
these things.

     What does the Pope say about this conduct of his allies?
Nothing. It would be "interference in polities" to notice what the
Italians did in Abyssinia or are doing in Greece and Yugo-Slavia,
what the Germans -- But I beg the Pope's pardon. He has twice used
very eloquent and moving language about outrages. You may not think
two protests in five years of bestiality a very high record for a
Pope. In fact, if we look into them the protests are not so
impressive. On January, 22, 1940 he referred to Poland in a
broadcast address and lamented that he heard of "infamy of all
kinds" and "horrible and inexcusable excesses." What did his German
allies say to that? Nothing. You see, he was referring to the
Russians. He said that he had heard that these outrages were "not
confined to districts under Russian occupation." We must, it is 

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               5

                   THE WAR AND PAPAL INTRIGUE

true, make some allowance for the Pope's ignorance. He evidently
imagined that the Russians had taken over some ten million Pole's
and were beating the life out of them, whereas, as the rest of us
know, the Russians had taken back only White Russians and
Ukrainians and were only too eager to make them feel at home in the
Soviet Union. In any case, although the press was still acridly
anti-Russian no responsible paper even suggested that they were
committing outrages.

     A little earlier a censure of the seizure of part of Finland
by Russia had shown that the eagle eye of the Vatican ranged even
over the frozen north in search of outrages to rebuke -- if they
were not committed by its allies. There were many of us who did not
at that time know what Russia had offered for the territory and how
vitally necessary it was in view of the coming war, but we knew
that Russians did not behave like the Pope's friends. The Papal
organ, however, the Osservatore Romano, surpassed itself --
especially as it had never condemned outrages before. It had such
lyrical passages as:

     "After twenty years of Bolshevik tyranny it now appears that
Communism which had already suppressed political liberty, stilled
individuality, reduced work to the status of slavery, and erected
violence into, a system, has added a new pearl to its diadem . . ."
After hounding men it now hounds nations.

     The Papacy complaining that some other institution stifles
individuality is rich, and one cannot help reflecting today that
for slaves the Russian workers fight with remarkable spirit. But
these are incidental trifles such as we pick up in all Papal
pronouncements. The broad comment on this Vatican rebuke of
aggression is this: by that time Germany had drenched the Jews with
horrors, carried out its infamous Blood Purge, and savagely
destroyed Czecho-Slovakia. Italy had perpetrated the grossest
outrages in Abyssinia and Albania, and Japan had overrun five
province's of China and treated tens of millions of the Chinese
with barbarity. The Vatican, which had representatives of the three
Powers in the Papal Court, had seen none of this wanton and
monstrous aggressiveness and its accompanying savagery. Just as
today it knows nothing about the savagery that is being perpetrated
on Serbs, Greeks, and other conquered peoples. But the moment
Russia enters upon a normal military operation -- not after a
treacherous pact of friendship, but after an earnest effort to
bargain for what it vitally needed -- the Pope ceases to be the
Great Neutral and discovers that he is the supreme judge of the
moral life of the world.

     The Russians committed no outrages in either Finland or the
provinces they recovered from Poland, although Poland had, as I
will show presently, shamefully persecuted those provinces for
twenty years. Today the Germans are in Russia and are surpassing
their own record of brutality. Mr. Winston Churchill does not love
Russia, so when he says that he has, officially, full and solid
information about the German atrocities we have to believe him. On
August 24 he said, speaking of Germany, in a carefully-prepared
broadcast:

 

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               6

                   THE WAR AND PAPAL INTRIGUE

     "As her armies advance whole districts are being exterminated.
Scores of thousands -- literally scores of thousands -- of
executions in cold blood are being perpetrated by the German
police-troops. Since the Mogul invasion of Europe in the sixteenth
century there has never been methodical, merciless butchery on such
a scale or approaching such a scale."

     On September 29 he spoke again about "the absolutely
frightful, indescribable atrocities which the German police-troops
are inflicting on the Russian population in the rear of the advance
of their armored soldiers."

     But the Pope has less to say than ever. One might gather from
the Catholic papers that he is so busy praying for peace that he
cannot maintain his customary moral survey of the world. Bunk. Not
even the banks and exchanges are watching the ebb and flow of the
red tide in Russia and calculating the chances of the issue more
carefully than the Vatican. He will not utter a word of censure
until we know that Germany is beaten. The common decent German
soldier is sickened by the infamies committed by the Nazi-trained
troops and police under Nazi leaders. A letter to his wife that was
found on the body of one ran:

     "I hate the day when I was born in Germany. I am shocked by
what goes, on in our army in Russia. Vice, loot, violence, murder,
murder, and murder. We destroy old men, women, and children and
kill simply for the sake of killing . . . If I survive the Russian
bullets and shells I will, in my present mood, perish from a German
bullet."

     Evidence accumulates daily that the Italian people and
soldiers, and most of the officers, are sick of the bestial
alliance into which Mussolini, with the cowardly connivance of the
King and the blessing of the Vatican, has drawn them. But the Pope
says nothing. The German and Italian clergy, 100,000 of them
besides paid officials, still cry whoopee.

     Will the Catholics of America and Britain try, when the day of
human judgment comes, to throw all the blame on Secretary of State
Pacelli who is now Pope Pius XII? It would not be surprising. A
year or two ago the plea was that the poor, harassed, aged Pope
felt that he must in the general interest of the Church let Spanish
bishops rejoice over the brutalities in Spain, Italian bishops lead
their people in cheering for the "victories" in Abyssinia and
Albania, and German bishops rub shoulders with the Nazis. Now they
discover that, as we or they knew all along, behind the Pope,
issuing orders in his name, was the vigorous Pacelli, Will they,
when the war is over or the tide of battle definitely turns, say
that the Church was compromised by a man of unfortunate character?

     We may have to defend poor Pacelli against the archbishops and
cardinals who lifted him to the skies a couple of years ago. He is
no more inhuman than my of themselves. He is a man of normal but
controlled sentimentality. In more fortunate circumstances he might
have been a successful Roman lawyer or banker, kind and generous to
his wife or some blonde baby. He is just a stricter churchman, more
narrowly concentrated on the interests of the Church, than any of 
the others, and that is precisely why they made him Pope.

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               7

                   THE WAR AND PAPAL INTRIGUE

     And as far as one can penetrate the august secrets of these
proceedings it was not so much the Italian as the foreign,
including the British and American cardinals, who turned a wavering
scale in his favor. Pius XI, of unhappy memory -- no Pope in modern
times had been so severely criticized by Catholic writers of
several countries -- died on February 10, 1940, and the cardinal
voters flew to Rome. The world learned how scrupulous is the
procedure of the Church, the cardinals are locked in a room where
they sleep and eat (and drink) until two-thirds of them agree upon
a Pope.

     What -- incidentally -- the world did not learn was the rather
amusing meaning of this Conclave (or "'shut in with a key"). The
history of Papal elections for the last sixteen centuries, or since
the Papacy became rich, beats the history of presidential elections
to a frazzle for bribery, intrigue, and good honest fighting. If
you read French and can get it read Petrucelli della Gattina's
Histoire diploinatique des Conclaves (4 vols, 1864-6), though you
will find a good deal of the material in Miss V. Pirie's Triple
Crown (1935). However, in 1271 the cardinals who were assembled for
an election in the Italian provincial town of Viterbo so disgusted
the towns folk by wrangling for three years that the civic
authorities locked them in a room and saw that none of them left it
or intrigued with outsiders until they elected a Pope. From that
date Conclaves began, though it must be confessed that the new
institution by no means put an end to bribery, intrigue, and
fighting.

     On March 2, Pacelli was elected. Unlike profane elections that
of a Pope begins with a very solemn invocation of the Holy Ghost --
it did even in the days when the bribery ran to a million dollars
and the murders to 200 -- and then there are grave deliberations,
and the cardinals visit each other in their cells (the cubicles
into which part of the room is divided). After each vote the papers
are burned and the smoke is conducted out by a pipe so that the
Romans shall see. We thus know that there were three "scrutinies",
or examinations of votes, so that it took a considerable time for
Pacelli to get the necessary two-thirds of the votes. In other
words, although he was certainly the ablest candidate, the best
expert on international affairs, and the best linguist, more than
half the cardinals were at first opposed to him. It is useless to
speculate on the reasons, but we receive with skepticism the report
that German and Italian cardinals tried to prevent his election at
the bidding of Hitler and Mussolini. Had Pacelli as Secretary of
State not done enough for them? The best authority, the Pope's
biographer Rankin, says that the non-Italian cardinals carried the
day for him.

     The final vote is said to have been unanimous, as was very apt
to happen when it was seen that other candidates had no chance. In
other words -- this is why I enter into detail -- the Church put a
crown not merely on the head of Eugenio Pacelli, but on the policy
he had pursued for ten years. We will remember that if a day comes
when American and British prelates try to disavow that policy. It
is probably true that he fooled them by his suave assurances when
he visited England and America that he was a friend of democracy
and peace. But it would be juster to say that they fooled 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               8

                   THE WAR AND PAPAL INTRIGUE

themselves. The Catholic Teeling, a layman, was fully aware and
gave it as a fact of common Catholic knowledge, that the Vatican
had for years been making every effort to counteract western
[democratic] influence, which is not considered very good for the
Church (The Pope in Politics, p. 3). The American cardinals and
prelates who reported after his visit to the United States in 1936
that he was "a great friend of democracy" knew that his visit to
South America in 1934 had been followed by the truculent
suppression of democracy, in which the Church cordially helped, in
nearly the whole of that half of the continent. Cardinal Hinsley,
who stressed above all others that they had elected a Pope of Peace
-- even making absurd play of the fact that pace is the Italian for
peace -- knew just as well that for three years he had urged an
attack on Bolshevism that would involve Italy, Germany, Japan, and
the United States in war, and that he had given his support to
Hitler, Mussolini, and Japan. Whoever was fooled, we will not be.
The princes of the Church set the seal of his most solemn approval
on Pacelli's policy by electing him King.



                           Chapter II


                    THE POPE'S PEACE EFFORTS


     Many will remember the note of synthetic admiration and
rejoicing that was struck in the entire press of the world when
Pacelli was elected on March 12. His biographer observes that while
for some obscure reasons the Italian papers grumbled those of
America and Great Britain glowed with satisfaction. The Archbishop
of Canterbury talked like an elderly virgin in the House of Lords
at Westminster, and his promise that if the new Pope would lead the
world into paths of peace and justice he would follow and support
him was hailed as a new and most promising religious phenomenon.
Ransom sums up the general enthusiasm by pointing out that upon a
world in flames there came at last a Pope with the inflexible
motto: Peace, Truth, and Charity.

     We skeptics are accused of stirring up sectarian strife in a
world that needs cooperative action, of indulging in destructive
criticism when what the race wants is constructive idealism. Who,
in the light of recent events, was right? Four years before the
election of Pius XII I wrote, in the Appeal to Reason Library,
every word that I say in these booklets about the tendencies in
life and about all events and developments to 1935. My work was
neither destructive nor constructive. It was realistic: a statement
of facts. And it differed from the statements of fact of these
spiritual people and the newspapers which broadcast everything they
said and ignored everything we said in that it was a full and
truthful statement of facts. If all those facts which I gave -- the
programs of Hitler and Mussolini, the origin and trend of Nazism
and Fascism, the situation in Spain and Austria and Poland, and so
on -- had been put squarely before the public in 1938 or 1939 there
would have been much less school-girlish rejoicing because a new
Pope spoke prettily about Peace, Truth, and Charity and much more 
demand for a realistic analysis of what was wrong and for
appropriate action.
                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               9

                   THE WAR AND PAPAL INTRIGUE

     The world was not in flames at the beginning of 1939. It had
accepted Mussolini's assurance that with the annexation of
Abyssinia for his surplus population he was now content; Hitler's
assurance that with his annexation of the German fringe of Czecho-
Slovakia he had reached the limit of his ambition; Japan's
assurance that it did not now covet a single additional square mile
of Chinese or other Asiatic territory.

     But every man who saw the broad truth about the world-
situation, that the race had entered upon a titanic conflict
between privilege -- wealth, Churches, all vested authority -- and
a new spirit that was reviled as Bolshevism, and that the utterly
corrupt and dangerous forces of Nazism, Fascism, and Japanese
Imperialism had been enlisted on the side of privilege, knew that,
while the world was not yet in flames, a sinister fire shouldered
underground, and it was no time for pretty talk about Peace and
Charity. Sluggish as British statesmen were, we now know that they
were preparing for the conflict that broke out later in the year,
though they protested that the risks of disturbing the peace of the
world by overt action (raising vast monition-plant's) restricted
them to such matters as secretly hiring premises for ministries in
the country, drafting schemes, and organizing medical and
undertaking services for vast numbers of wounded and dead
civilians.

     I must confine myself to these matters in so far as they
involve the Church of Rome. The idea that the new Pope entered a
world of danger and confusion for which others were responsible
brought to it a new and beautiful gospel is, we now understand,
tripe. He had had as Secretary of State at least for the preceding
five years the same power which he would now wield as Pope, and he
had deliberately used it to help the work of the forces of evil
because, he believed, it was to the interest of the Church. It was
nothing new for him to talk about peace. As the inspirer of Pius XI
he had put the praise of peace on his lips or in his fountain-pen
twice a year for years. In the intervals he had called through the
Pope's mouth for the extinction of Bolshevism and upon that cry
only one possible interpretation can be put -- war. We saw that
Papal policy after 1919 was bound to seek this end above all
others. Socialism and Communism were running the Church. And the
only possible explanation of the Vatican entering into and in spite
of every rebuff clinging to the alliance with the corrupt forces of
Nazism, Fascism, and Japan is that they promised to accomplish
that. It was the reason, also, why Pacelli, in the name of Pius XI,
wrote an encyclical enjoining every Catholic state to become a
Fascist Corporative State, and practically all the South American
Republics as well as Portugal and Hungary, and later Spain, France,
and Belgium complied. Coercion alone brought apostates to heel.

     I made short reference in one booklet to -- as far as I can
discover -- the first public declaration by the Papacy -- except
that the Pope began to lash out with his hatred of Russia in 1926
-- of the sentiment that had long been forced upon it: that
Socialism and Communism must be destroyed and that, since argument
about the beauty of the Catholic faith ran off Socialists and
Communists (who knew its history too well) like water off a duck's
back, they must be destroyed by violence. As the point is 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               10

                   THE WAR AND PAPAL INTRIGUE

fundamental let us return to it for a moment. The occasion was a
reception at the Vatican of Spanish refugees on September 14, 1936.
The Pope's speech to them, which is published in English by the
Catholic Truth Society -- I do not know if by this time they
realized their blunder and suppressed it -- with the title The
Spanish Terror is no rambling talk of an aged and agitated priest.
It is a polished rhetorical address, prepared in the Secretariat of
State. It represents the rebellion of Catholic Fascist generals in
Spain as a "satanic" attack on the established order by the very
men who had established it, and it says that this is the work of
"those forces which have already given proof and estimate of their
quality in the attempt to subvert established order of every kind
from Russia to China, from Mexico to South America". As Chiang Kai-
Chek had already, under the treacherous guidance of his earlier
associates in Japan, destroyed Communism in China (and prepared the
way for Japan), the Pope's allies were destroying it in Spain, and
the Fascist governments of South America had destroyed it there at
Pacelli's request, the meaning is clear. The Pope invited Germany
(with the aid of rugged divisions from Catholic countries) and
Japan to attack Russia and the United States to attack and annex
Mexico. From that date the cry for the extinction of Bolshevism in
Russia and Mexico echoed every month through the Catholic world.

     It is plain that this sentiment of the Pope is not merely
inconsistent with his gospel of peace, but it shaped a policy which
was the very worst possible for the world and for the real prospect
of peace at that time. I do not suggest that the Pope was either
muddle-headed or hypocritical. He had made his position clear a
score of times: peace -- when Communism was extinct by the conquest
of Russia and Mexico and his Nazi and Fascist allies had received,
as a gift, what the Pope thought they wanted. It was the Pope's
admirers who were muddle-headed or -- when they told the world that
Pacelli was going to work for peace without qualification --
hypocritical.

     Recent events have now shown that the peace of the world and
the removal of the corruption that threatened civilization depended
above all upon the democracies and (in some form or other) the
United States allying themselves closely with Russia. I may be
pardoned for explaining that this is not on my own part a case of
being wise after the event. In the A. B. C. Library of Living
Knowledge (No. 3, Economic Gains of the Soviet Union, 1937) I fully
vindicated that great civilization against calumnies that were
current in nearly the whole press and showed how peace was the
first condition it required for the completion of its splendid
work. I pointed out that whatever dreams Russians may have had at
an earlier date of inspiring revolution in other countries had been
long abandoned, and they were content to let the peoples of the
world judge for themselves between the civilizations of the west
and that of the Soviet Union. I warned the reader that it was just
because the Russians were so successful in creating a civilization
without private capital and without religion that the combined
influence of capitalism and the Churches used almost the entire
press to libel them. "This generation," I said (p. 29), "is the
most heavily duped and doped in all recent history, and its blunder




                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               11

                   THE WAR AND PAPAL INTRIGUE

may prove the most costly in history to the workers of the world.".
I insisted that a great war of aggression was, on the open 
professions of Hitler and Mussolini and because of this criminal
aloofness from Russia, certain to come and said:

     "If this war of aggression, which, if it were successful,
would be a signal to Mussolini to take up -- at the deadly expense
of France and England -- his dream of an eastern empire, is
averted, the world will have to thank the Soviet Union (p. 29)."

     I have knowledge of even Rationalists who had long read my
books but refused to read another line of mine because of that
little book on Russia. They preferred the superficial gush and
treacherous optimism of accepted writers and journalists who fooled
them about the new Papal era of Peace and Charity.

     Since this is the one defence of the action of the Black
International, that the Pope used his world-prestige to issue one
fervent appeal after another for peace, we must make a decisive
reply to it. We are concerned with the action of the Church and
will not be diverted by this trick of distinguishing between local
hierarchies, as if they had a remarkable degree of independence of
the Vatican, and the Pope. We shall see, indeed everybody knows,
that the German Church loudly supported Hitler, as usual, when he
launched the world-war and all its horrors, the Italian Church
fully supported Mussolini in his miserable entrance into the war as
soon as he felt that victory was certain, and the Spanish, Irish,
Hungarian, and Portuguese Churches -- and when the time came the
Belgian and French Churches -- supported their governments in
assisting and fawning on the aggressors.

     But for the moment we must clearly understand the action of
the Pope himself. Chanting the virtues of peace is as idle as
preaching justice in the abstract and is often far more dangerous.
The only occasion on which I ever addressed a meeting of a Peace
Society was in 1938. I at first declined the invitation and
consented only on the understanding that I would tell them truths
which they would not like. The bulk of the members refused to
attend -- the local Churches had been busy -- and to the few who
did I presented a realistic analysis of the state of the world,
which the chief officials described as masterly and worthy of their
deepest consideration, and a solemn warning of what was coming. I
was not further invited to address one of the hundreds of Peace
Societies in Great Britain, and a few months later they were all
enthusiastic over the new Pope's beautiful sentiments! These people
flatter themselves that they have superior sentiments to the rest
of us when they really differ from us in flabbiness of intellect
or, in the better cases, in lack of realism.

     The plain truth is that the Pope talked peace and worked for
war. He had a very large share in the libel and hatred of Russia
which prevented the one combination of sound forces that could
ensure peace. France had entered into an alliance of mutual defense
with Russia, but the Pope openly condemned it, and the Catholic
military chiefs robbed it of reality and effectiveness. On the
other hand the Pope clung to the alliances with the corrupt forces
which he had cemented. It required very little intelligence and 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               12

                   THE WAR AND PAPAL INTRIGUE

study of world-affairs at that time to perceive that the only
possible danger to the peace of the world lay in Germany, Italy,
and Japan. A closer student, as the Pope was supposed to be, could
go further. He would know that those three Powers, his friends,
were determined to start an aggressive war. What, in such
circumstances, was the value of his appeals to the world at large
to see the beauty of peace?

     Well, says the apologist, wearily, at least he soon perceived
his error and entered upon a series of practical proposals for
ensuring peace. Did he? He was crowned Pope on March 12. I said in
an earlier essay that it detracts somewhat from the beauty of his
words about Charity that on the very day of his coronation the Jews
were, with terrible injustice and suffering, turned out of Italy,
and he said nothing. Again I beg his pardon. He protected some of
the Jews. In October (1941) the Italian paper La Vita Italiana
sourly complained that not only were there still Jews in Italy but
some of them were millionaires and occupied very high positions in
the state-service. One of these, a Signor Sacerdoti, had just been
appointed Director General of all the shipyards of Italy. The paper
went on to say:

     "The appointment again confirms the general conviction that
Italian Jews are strongly favored and protected by the Catholic
Church and that wealthy Jews in Italy are still very influential."

     I always acknowledge without a qualm these little injustices
to the clergy into which incomplete knowledge betrays me at rare
intervals. At the same time I must point out, in case you do not
know, Italian, that "Sacerdoti" means "Priests", so that this one
protected Jew of whom I have heard was obviously a Roman Catholic
as well as a millionaire, and therefore a fit person, to come under
the Pope's mantle of Charity: which did not cover the 69,999 Jews
who were robbed and cast out.

     March 12 was not merely a real Yom Kippur for the Jews of
Italy. It was the day on which, as I have elsewhere stated, the
sleek and treacherous priest, Msgr. Tiszo, went from Slovakia to
see Hitler and arrange with him for the final betrayal, or sale, of
Czecho-Slovakia. That foul deed was certainly done with the
agreement of the Vatican. It made a final end of the Liberalism,
which the Pope hated, of the Czechs, and it made solidly Catholic
Slovakia an independent state, another member of the Pope's new
dream of a Catholic bloc and abjectly submissive to the Vatican. As
I said, you can believe if you like that Tiszo accomplished this
without consulting Rome. But the step meant far more. It finally
remained the great obstacle to Hitler's march to Russia and the
Balkans. How did the Pope of Peace regard that? It is well known
that even Chamberlain was now convinced that war was absolutely
inevitable. The whole world saw it. Are we to suppose that the new
Pope in the weeks, intense brooding and praying, with three hours'
sleep a night, that followed his coronation (his biographer, says)
did not see what every statesman and editor in the world saw?

     Well, says the apologist, still more wearily, Pacelli girded
his thin loins and settled down to six months' fighting to avert
the great calamity. Let me say at once that Pacelli was not such a 
fool as one might be tempted to think when one reflects how he had 

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               13

                   THE WAR AND PAPAL INTRIGUE

prepared the irresistible conditions of a great war. He is a man of
considerable ability and I suggest the alternative view that he
knew well that war was inevitable, was convinced that Germany,
Italy, and Japan -- we shall see later that he was aware of the
joint plan -- would win, and was equally convinced that this would
prove to be to the advantage of the Church. The known facts permit
us to make only one concession to the claim that after all he was
human as well as ecclesiastical: he would work sincerely for peace
in the sense of appeasement or granting Hitler, Mussolini, and
Japan what they quite obviously wanted, and he probably did not
realize how much they wanted that they did not make obvious.

     In this light we may review his peace-efforts in the fateful
summer of 1939. The first was unfortunate. He was crowned on March
12 and he emerged from his week of Yogi meditation on the "9th.
Easter Sunday was to fall on April 9, and he had to have a
particularly fervent appeal to the world for peace ready for that
date. But on Good Friday Mussolini took the second step in his war
by invading Albania! The Pope's biographer tells us that he was
annoyed, in so far as consecrated persons can be, both by the
desecration of the holy day and the need to rewrite some passages
of his appeal for peace. To what extent he was really duped we do
not know. Catholics say that he wrote a letter to the King of Italy
to prevent the invasion. It would be as futile as writing to the
king of toyland, but there is no evidence that such a letter was
ever written. Everybody in Italy knew -- was bound to know -- that
a large Italian force was concentrating at the Adriatic ports for
the invasion of Albania; and every thoughtful Italian must have
known that Albania was for Mussolini just the same stage in a
journey to the East as Czecho-Slovakia had been for Hitler. But
whether or no it is true that Mussolini double-crossed his partner
in crime by taking the step, in order to make sure that he got the
southern half of the Balkans for Italy, need not be discussed here,
and the desecration of Good Friday does not interest us. We will
examine the eastern expansion as a whole and the Vatican's relation
to it in a separate essay.

     The upshot was that, while nice-minded people all over the
world read the Pope's appeal with the usual moist eyes and muddled
brains, for serious folk it was at the best a damp squib, at the
worst a mockery. And the Pope soon knew it. Many believe that,
while Hitler has certainly not the vast planning and organizing
intelligence with which Nazis credit him, he probably does throw
off the general plans or imaginative scheme's which the massive
military and economic brain behind him then works out in detail.
However that may be, we see a steady and very able method in the
great plot: a step, very carefully prepared (the Saar, the
Rhineland, Austria, etc.) every six months or so, then six months
of covert preparation for and open lying about the next step. After
Czecho-Slovakia the lying became useless. Only Dutchmen and
Belgians were duped by it. Poland was to be the next stage; and the
next stage meant war on a European scale.

     There is evidence, which we will see later, that, as we should
assume, the Vatican knew this as well as the French and British
Foreign Offices. A fortnight after Easter the Pope, his biographer
tells us, received so secret a message from his Nuncio in Berlin 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               14

                   THE WAR AND PAPAL INTRIGUE

that he opened the letter with his own hands and kept the contents
secret. Only his Secretary of State, Maglione, knew what reply he
made to it. Is it fanciful to suppose that it apprised him of the
next step that Hitler meditated? It was followed, the biographer
says, by "feverish activity" at the Vatican, the Pope consulting
his Nuncios from Berlin and Warsaw and seeing numbers of bishops
from France, Germany, and Poland. As the quarrel about Dantzig, the
unmistakable herald of Hitler's next step, soon broke out, the
Vatican could not even pretend to be taken by surprise.

     What, then, were all these efforts to secure peace of which
the Catholic apologist speaks? We ignore the Easter lyric. It
reminds us of one gangster sending a wreath to the funeral of
another. In May he suggested -- so unobtrusively that it could be
denied when the plan failed -- a Five Power Conference over the
German-Polish dispute. The five Powers were to be Poland, Germany,
Great Britain, France, and Italy. You may think him either
unpractical or insincere but the fact is that he wanted Russia,
which was deeply interested, excluded, on his usual assumption that
it was not a respectable Power, and Italy, which was not interested
and would intervene only to support Hitler, included. France, which
was now, to the Pope's annoyance, allied with Russia, and Great
Britain refused. The Conference would certainly not have checked
Hitler.

     It is said -- and, of course, denied -- that the Pope then
suggested a Conference on the economic grounds of the world-unrest.
Mussolini had been complaining for some time that Great Britain and
France were trying to starve the Axis economically, and that Tunis,
Jibute, and a share in the control of the Suez were vital economic
requirements of Italy and would entirely satisfy it; while his
troops were trying to cross Albania to Greece and his Fascist
toughs were encouraged to bawl in the streets and theaters that
Italy must have Savoy, Corsica, Malta, etc. Hitler was pleading
that once the question of Dantzig and the Corridor was settled he
would lay aside his armor forever. Any man who wishes may assume
that the Pope really believed them. His economic peace plan was an
attempt to get Great Britain and a France that was already weakened
by treason to give them what they wanted. In any case his
suggestion was rejected as amateurish.

     These various proposals are interesting only in connection
with the belief of many that the Vatican has as fine an
intelligence-service as any Chancellory in Europe. If that were so,
the Pope would know that these pretended economic grievances of
Germany, Italy, and Japan were dishonest pretexts for crime. They
were based upon two lies: over-population and a disadvantage in
getting supplies from parts of the world which were included in the
empires of Great Britain and France.

     The grievance about over-population is nauseous when we recall
how Hitler for six years and Mussolini for fifteen years had been
whipping up the birth rate by every means in their power; and in
this their action coincided with that of the Catholic clergy.
Neither in Italy nor Germany was there the least reticence about
the reasons for demanding early marriages and giving special prizes
to parents of large families. They wanted soldiers. "We were born 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               15

                   THE WAR AND PAPAL INTRIGUE

to die for Germany" was painted up in boys schools in that country,
and leading statesmen urged mothers to look anxiously for the first
mystic flicker of the "starlight of battle" in a baby boy's eyes.
The Italians were less absurd but equally frank. The men who will
be called to account in future history are the states-men and
writers of other countries who saw year by year this frenzied and
artificial attempt to increase the population, accompanied by
hypocritical pleas that the countries were already so
overpopulated, that they must have more territory. The Catholic
clergy were the worst offenders. They pretended to discover that
birth control was immoral. Their real purpose in their ban on it
was to secure an increase of the Catholic population while the non-
Catholic practiced birth control.

     In point of fact, Germany was very far from overpopulated, and
Italy was by no mean's one of the most densely populated countries.
England has about 800 people to the square mile, while Italy has
only 350 and Germany 322. Belgium, Holland, and other countries
annexed by Germany on the plea of wanting more "living room" for
its distressed population are twice as densely populated as it is.
The whole economic plea of Germany, which the Pope wanted gravely
discussed, stank with mendacity. Sir Norman Angell, one of the most
anxious of men to remove grounds of war, proved years ago in a
special study "that England had very little economic advantage from
its empire." You can trust the Canadians and Australians to see
that any advantage is mutual. Hitler says repeatedly and
emphatically in Mein Kampf that Germany does not want colonies: in
which he includes dominions of the British type. It wants land in
Europe, he insists, and we now see it clearly. He wants to reduce
Europe to economic servitude to the Nazis.

     The Pope's biographer complains that after a time both Great
Britain and Germany refused to take the Pope further into their
confidence. We do not wonder. But, whether you prefer to believe
that he was not willing to be pushed out of the spotlight or that
he really thought he could help the interest of peace, he tried
again. He issued a very pretentious document in which he stated the
conditions of peace, and half the world began again to discuss the
marvelous sagacity and moral serenity of his famous "Five Points".

     It was, in point of fact, his worst effort. The material part
of his first and most important point was: "A fundamental postulate
of an honorable and just peace is that of the right to life and
freedom of all nations, big and small, powerful and weak." It is
exasperating that most papers, in their eagerness to please
Catholic readers and advertisers, promised this as a very clear-
headed piece of moral guidance in a world of confusion. Such a
right has been a platitude in political theory for more than half
a century. One is tempted to say ever since the ropes were
compelled by the Italian armies to let the inhabitants of Central
Italy decide by plebiscite how they preferred to live. But for
Pacelli-Pius to formulate this principle solemnly to the world in
the year 1939 was a breath-taking piece of audacity.

     As I showed in an earlier booklet, four-fifths of the
Catholics of the world live under a Fascist regime, and they are
assured by their priests that this is in accordance with the Pope's


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               16

                   THE WAR AND PAPAL INTRIGUE

teaching! What is worse, most of them have had this despotic regime
imposed upon them under Pacelli and at his direct instigation. I
have shown how freedom disappeared almost whenever he visited a
country or it came under Catholic authorities: in 20 Republics of
Central and South America, Portugal, Hungary, Slovakia, Poland, and
in the end France and Belgium. The Black International was solely
responsible for robbing the people of Vienna of their right to
choose their mode of life and cordially cooperated in depriving the
Spaniards of that right. The Papacy had been an intimate ally of
the Fascists for ten years in refusing the Italians the means of
expressing their wishes and of the Nazis for six years. It had
consented by silence to the theft of that right from the people of
Abyssinia, Bohemia, Moravia, and Albania. It demanded almost every
month that the people of Russia and Mexico should be violently
deprived of that right. And the Pope crowns this formidable list of
encroachments on the liberty of peoples which he inspired or
blessed by assuring the world that to respect the right of self-
determination is the first condition of the peace it ardently
desires! I need not go on to ask what serious prospect he thought
there was of Germany, Italy, and Japan, the only three powers to
whom it was necessary to preach, agreeing to it.

     The least that the world could do, since the press is not open
for candid reflections on the Pope's actions, was to ignore him and
his Five Points. The other points were platitudes. The second
condition of peace was disarmament: a very practical thing to say
in 1939. Then we get counsels to learn from the past, to consider
the demands of racial minorities, and to cultivate mutual goodwill
and a sense of justice. It was like proposing to sell a man
asbestos paint when his house was burning furiously. If the Pope,
had framed these points in the office of the Secretariat of State
in 1929 and had broadcast them sternly whenever a violation of them
seemed imminent he might not have averted the coming tragedy but he
would have saved the honor of the Papacy. He could not. Authority
is the first principle and coercion the indispensable instrument of
the Church. Some Protestant bishops applauded the Pope's Five
Points. Others asked what freedom, good-will, and justice non-
Catholics had in Poland, Spain, Portugal, Italy, Hungary, and a
score of other Catholic states.


                           Chapter III


                    POLAND PAYS FOR ITS PIETY


     What passed between the Vatican and the Nazis before the
invasion of Poland and the opening of the European War only the
Pope and a very small number of his collaborators know. On April
24, as I said, the question of Slovakia being now settled and
Hitler in possession of the bridge to the Ukraine and the Balkans,
the Pope got a letter from his Berlin representative in a secrecy
that surprises and puzzles his biographer, it took two days of
solitary reflection for him to decide upon the answer, and only he 




                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               17

                   THE WAR AND PAPAL INTRIGUE

and Cardinal Maglione know to this day what the answer was. Then
there were visits to the Vatican of the Rumanian and French 
ambassadors and various German and Polish bishops, and there was a
brisk secret correspondence with the Nuncios at Berlin, Warsaw, and
Paris.

     Clearly the new Pope was confronted with a terrible dilemma
and he was anxious to keep secret even from the Church what
decision he took. Rome is one of the busiest sounding boardes of
rumors in Europe and the Vatican press bureau is as Pegler has
shown, one of the leakiest or most venal, but at this stage the
secret was guarded with unprecedented rigor. If you will next
notice the significant fact that the Pope refrained from an
explicit condemnation of the invasion of Poland as carefully as in
the case of Abyssinia and Albania -- he certainly never used a word
to compare with his language about the Russians when they simply
took back Rusalan provinces which Germany would have annexed -- you
will hardly hesitate in your guess what the secret was. The Pope
was informed of the plan to invade Poland and was induced to assent
on certain conditions: probably that the occupation of Poland would
be temporary and was indispensable for the attack on Russia, that
religion would be respected in Poland, and that the Church would
get concessions in Germany and great opportunities in Russia. The
idea seems to have been that the Pope would persuade the very
docile Poles to submit on these conditions and would continue to
inflame them against Russia, the only Power that could save them.

     In refraining from condemning the invasion of Poland -- I do
not count later protests when the Catholic, body was threatened
with annihilation -- the Pope could not plead, as he did in the
case of Norway, that the Catholic body was small and he must think
of his German Church and not offend the Nazis. Whether or no that
is a respectable ground of action in a Pope, the fact is that there
were twice as many sincere Catholics in Poland as in the Reich. A
cynic would add that, though it had more adherents and of a more
passionate loyalty, the Polish Church was not a quarter as rich as
the German Church. We will, of course, not admit that the Vatican
was moved by so profane a consideration, but the numbers are
indisputable. We have seen that by 1939 there were not 12,000,000
Catholics left in Germany: probably not more than 10,000,000. No
one disputes that of the 33,000,000 people of Poland more than
20,000,000 were sincere Catholics and several further million were
compulsory members of the Church: a type of Catholic of which the
Vatican seems to be equally proud.

     This strange situation requires an historical explanation, but
for even a short summary of the history of Catholicism in Poland I
must refer to my Appeal to Reason Library (No. 5., "Roman
Catholicism in Poland and Russia") and confine myself here to a few
points which are essential to understand what follows. There is, as
I have often pointed out, a close parallel between Poland and
Ireland, especially if you think of Catholic Ireland before British
Liberalism relieved many of its grievances. Both countries suffered
from their geographical position, on the outskirts of civilization,
and in both cases this gave the priests a rich opportunity to
exploit the poor and very backward population. And just as the
earlier tyranny of Protestant England had hardened the faith in 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               18

                   THE WAR AND PAPAL INTRIGUE

Ireland and brought priests and people closer together, so had the
long tyranny of Orthodox Catholic Russia in Poland. While, however,
Britain had very materially modified its treatment of the Irish
more than half a century ago, Russian tyranny had continued until
1917.

     We thus recognize a very serious traditional ground for that
hostility to Russia which prevented Poland from entering into
alliance with the one Power that could protect it, but it is due
mainly to the Black International that hostility became worse after
1918 and completely destroyed the chances of checking Nazism on
that side.

     At Versailles, to which the Poles sent Paderewski to lull the
ears of statesmen with his music, a Republic of 30,000,000
inhabitants was set up. Not much more than half of these were
Poles, so that there were few parts of Europe in which the
Conference of Versailles sowed the seeds of a future war so
recklessly as in Poland. In particular the Poles claimed Russian
territory (White Russia and the Galician Ukraine) containing seven
or eight million people of alien race and generally alien religion,
and, to the disgust of the British representatives, the French
bulldozed Wilson, who reeled under the shower of weird geographical
names (and lies) into consenting. The Poles also claimed Silesia
from Germany, but it was so obviously far more German than Polish
that the League of Nations was directed to take a plebiscite.

     The time came when the French were disgusted with their Polish
pet -- they had supported it as a bulwark against Bolshevism -- and
they gave away the fact that the plebiscite was corrupt. See the
Catholic Rene Martel's La France et la Pologne (1931). The Poles
had formed a special organization for corrupting and intimidating
voters and officials, and one of the three directors of it was
Msgr, Adamski, Catholic Bishop of Posen. The Black International
had begun its record in Poland, and there is no other part of the
world in which it has proceeded with such gross inhumanity, as we
shall see presently. The vote was still 700,000 for Germany and
400,000 for Poland, and the Commissioners decided to divide the
province. This division was, carried out with the same corruption,
the richest districts going to Poland even when the great majority
of the inhabitants were found to be Germans. They had to sell out
to Poles, at a heavy loss, and transfer to Germany. Still the Poles
were not content. The League of Nations permitted them to take
advantage of Russia's distress and seize Vilna and part of
Lithuania. Ever since that period of grab and corruption there has
been a monument on German soil facing Poland with the inscription:
"Germans, never forget of what blind hatred has robbed you."

     How in spite of all this greed and the large loans extended by
France and Britain, Poland sank to the position of the poorest
country in Europe -- read Spivak's Europe Under the Terror if you
want to know what exploitation really is -- cannot be discussed
here. The point of interest to us is that the country no sooner rid
itself of the tyranny of Czarist Russia than it set up a still more
galling tyranny over its own minorities, and in this the Black
International worked in intimate cooperation with the Dictator
Pilsudski. Marshal Pilsudski, over whose death in 1935 we shed 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               19

                   THE WAR AND PAPAL INTRIGUE

tears as we read the record of his virtues in all our papers, was,
not to put too fine a point on it, a brute and a crook. He had led
the Poles who fought for Germany against us in the 1914-1918 war,
and they had not thought it discreet to send him to Versailles. He
had joined the White War against Russia, which he hated with all
the bitterness of (like Mussolini) a renegade Socialist, and only
the French had saved him from losing Poland to them. He disgusted
every group of politicians, and the Socialists saved him from ruin
and he then sent their leaders to a fortress and tortured them
exactly (even to the guards putting excrement in their food) as
Nazis later tortured Jews in Germany.

     As far as I can discover Pilsudski never became a sincere
Catholic -- again like his friend Mussolini -- but he acted with
and on behalf of the Church, which is more powerful than in Ireland
or Peru. Let me explain at once that the appalling persecution that
lasted twenty years in Poland was a joint affair of Church and
state and aimed equally at destroying the nationality and the
religion of the immense non-Polish minorities. In the Galician
Ukraine alone there were 1,000,000 Catholic Poles, 1,250,000 Jews,
4,000,000 Greek Uniates (acknowledging the Pope but with a Greek
liturgy), and 4,000,000 Orthodox or Greek Catholics. In the west
were about 1,000,000 German Protestants; and there were, of course,
representatives of all minorities and not a few skeptics in the
cities. For twenty years every device of persecution and brutality
was used to destroy the religious liberty and the national tongues
and customs of these minorities, although the Poles had given
Versailles a solemn engagement to respect them. I am concerned only
with the coercion in religious matters, and the reason for
recalling it here is obvious. During all the years when the Vatican
and the Black International in every country, but especially in the
United States and Canada, was inspiring, on the ground of its
"persecution of religion", that hatred of Russia which has been of
incalculable service to the Nazis, this same Black International
not only knew that there was no persecution of religion in Russia
-- it was Polish conspiracy that brought punishment on the
Catholics there but was conducting a quite fiendish persecution of
religion in Poland and preventing the press in other countries,
with only four exception's amongst all the dailies of Canada, the
United States, and Great Britain, from publishing the facts. The
honorable exceptions were the Toronto Evening Telegram, the Chicago
Daily News, the New York Herald-Tribune, and the Manchester
Guardian (England); and the persecutions had been in progress for
eleven years when they discovered it.

     The Ukrainians of Galicia had sent a deputation to Versailles
to protest against incorporation in Poland and claim independence.
The French had got the petition dismissed, and the Poles had
promised to respect their minority-rights. Six months later they
addressed to the French a memoir (Les atrocites polonaises en
Galicie Ukrainienne) which showed a very brutal persecution,
political and religious raging over the whole vast area. In one
overcrowded and filthy jail 200 of the 2000 prisoners were Orthodox
priests. More than 1000 priests had been arrested and Polish Roman
priests stalked like ghouls in the rear of the police and soldiers
taking over the schools and chapels of the dispossessed Greek
priests. The soldiers were instructed to subject the Greek priests 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               20

                   THE WAR AND PAPAL INTRIGUE

to every kind of humiliation and mockery so as to break the
attachment of the people. But the peasants and farmers reacted with
the fiery protests that might have been expected, and "whole
villages were depopulated by massacre." The women were raped and
beaten, the men shot by the thousand. In other words, the Catholic
Poles were perpetrating in Poland twenty years ago just those
atrocities which are now exercised upon themselves by the Germans,
and, except for this authoritative account in French, which was not
translated into any other language, the world was not permitted to
know anything about it.

     It is an important secondary aim of these booklets to warn the
reader of the extraordinary extent and pernicious nature of the
Catholic censorship of the press and of publicity generally. Just
about that time, twenty years ago, I spent six months in New York
and when I suggested to a well-known publisher, who asked me for a
book, that I should write on the Catholic Church, he refused and
assured me that I would not find a publisher for such work in New
York. Few publishers have any sympathy with the Church -- the only
one I found with such personal admiration of it was, curiously, my
Rationalist friend G.H. Putnam -- but the press would not bring to
the notice of the public, in the usual way, books that were
(offensive to Catholics", and they submitted that it was useless to
publish them. Libraries were often intimidated from buying them and
booksellers from exposing them for sale. Haldeman-Julius is the
only publisher in America during the last ten years who has enabled
me to tell truths of the kind I tell here, yet it will be evident
that the world would have been far better equipped to meet the
darkening future if the whole truth had been put before it year
after year.

     I have devoted a paragraph to events of twenty year's ago
because they were but the first page in a chapter of persecution
which covers the whole intervening period and is very material from
several angles to my present theme. The matter not only affords a
very striking illustration of the suppression of truth which it is
important to know. It shows that the worst blunders of Versailles,
which we blamed so fluently, were enormously aggravated by the
conduct of the Catholic Poles. It explains that bitter hostility of
the Poles to the Russians which caused them to lend a hand in every
conspiracy against the Soviet government since 1919 and brought
upon the Catholic priests in Russia, most of whom were Poles, the
legitimate legal proceedings which the Vatican and the American
bishops represented as persecution of religion. It shows that
outrages as vile as any committed by the Japs in China and now by
Nazis in many lands were being perpetrated by the most profoundly
Catholic state in the world for twenty years while nice-minded folk
everywhere were wondering whether the new barbarism was not due to
a decay of religion. And it puts in a strange light that standing
excuse of the Vatican for its conduct, that the extension of its
rule over further millions of men or the maintenance of that rule
over million's who seem to be rejecting it is so important for the
moral and social good of men that we must be lenient in regard to
the crookedness of its policy.





                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               21

                   THE WAR AND PAPAL INTRIGUE

     If ever this appalling record of persecution in Poland by the
Catholic Poles is forced upon general public notice we shall 
probably hear the usual distinction between the action of a local
hierarchy and the action of the Vatican, I need not repeat that we
are here considering the conduct of the Black International as a
whole not simply of the Popes, and we are not embarrassed by being
unable to trace in every case the instructions of the Vatican to
national Churches. But this distinction is not even plausible in
the case of Poland. The present Pope Pius XII, has, we saw, an
intimate knowledge of German affairs, and no plea of ignorance or
misinformation can be made in connection with any of his relations
to that country. But the late, Pope Plus XI, had the same personal
interest in Poland, his pontificate (1922-1939) exactly coincides
with the Catholic Reign of Terror in that country.

     Any writer must dwell with reluctance on the misconduct of a
people which bore, and with great heroism, the first brutal onset
of the European War and suffers so bitterly for it today. It is,
however, necessary to tell the whole truth if we are to appreciate
the insincerity of the pretensions of the Black International, the
truth about its conduct, and the mendacity with which a good deal
of that conduct is concealed. It is fortunately easier in America
than elsewhere to learn the truth. When the Chicago Daily News and
the Herald-Tribune disturbed the clerical folk who were raving
about persecution in Russia -- Jewish rabbis joining in processions
with bishops in New York while financiers applauded from the
windows -- by showing that the real persecution was in Poland,
officials in Washington answered inquirers with the suave
assurances of the Polish Catholic representatives that it was "all
lies." But there is a large body of Ukrainians in the United
States, and in 1931 they collected and published a large volume of
testimony (letters, reports, journalistic accounts, etc.) of the
outrages.

     No impartial person who reads this (Atrocities in the Ukraine,
1931, edited by Emil Revyuk) can for a moment doubt the truth of
the statements. The authority is absolute. The details are
revolting. The defense urged by some is that, the Ukrainians had
rebelled against their Polish masters. Yes, after years of brutal
treatment in violation of the promise's made by Poland when it
received the province. But a nation of 30,000,000, spending a very
high proportion of its revenue on an army which could stand up to
Germany for three weeks hardly needed torture and brutality to
suppress any revolt in a province. Flogging, with whips loaded with
wire or iron, was a daily occurrence. Pregnant women and girls were
beaten. Heated irons were applied to the feet. Water, sometimes
mixed with oil, was forced down their nostrils. Men -- not merely
peasants but professional men and scholars -- were deprived of
sleep until they became half-insane. There were 200,000 in jail in
1930 and torture was used lavishly on them to make them betray
others. The brutality was even worse in 1934 and 1935, though it
seems to have relented a little after the death of Pilsudski in the
latter year.

     The first encyclical that the Pope issued in 1939 deplored
that the root of all evil in the world was the decay of religion.
One wonders how many sage editorials took up and confirmed that
text; and not one in a hundred of these papers had informed its 

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               22

                   THE WAR AND PAPAL INTRIGUE

readers that bestiality of the kind that will make sociologists of
the future hesitate to call our social order a civilization had
been going on for twenty years in the most religious country in
Europe. Poland was to 1939 far more Catholic than Eire or Peru. A
French Catholic visited it in 1932 and wrote an article on it in
the Catholic Revue des Deux Mondes (February 1, 1933). He describes
exhibitions of piety in public to which you will find no parallel
in any other country. American Catholics were, at the time, telling
non-Catholic neighbors that if they could only see religious life
in a solidly Catholic country they would perceive the beauty of the
Church. Well, Poland was the most solidly Catholic country in the
world, and its priests and bishops were equally behind this
persecution, which extended also to German Protestants and Polish
Freethinkers, with the politicians of the Pilsudski school, They
were just as eager to destroy the Uniate, Orthodox, and Protestant
Churches as the politicians were to make everybody thoroughly
Polish. That is abundantly shown in Revyuk's book.

     It is hardly necessary to point out how these facts make a
mockery of the Vatican's assurance to the world that when the
Russian troops entered this Galician Ukraine in 1939 they committed
outrages as the German troops did in Posen. Roman Catholic Poles
and the few other Roman Catholics in the province fought against
the Russians, but what was likely to be the mutual attitude of the
Ukrainians and the Russian's after 20 years of this agony? The
Ukrainians hated the Poles mortally. The Russians were an army of
liberation. The jails were opened. The farms were restored to their
owners. But the Papal lie was reproduced respectfully in the world-
press. I remember very few papers which even troubled to explain
that the two provinces taken over by Russia, palpably to anticipate
a German annexation of them, were Russian provinces wantonly torn
from their natural unity by Versailles, but I do not remember a
single paper that explained what grounds the Ukrainians had for
relief and how bitterly they hated the Poles.

     Another reason why I enlarge on this painful chapter of Polish
history just before the war is because it has a vital bearing on
one of the grossest blunders of the democracies and greatest
advantages of the Nazis, the estrangement from Russia. Since I
cannot put before the reader any correspondence of the Vatican with
the Polish hierarchy he must decide on a general knowledge of
Church methods how far the Vatican knew and approved of the brutal
persecution I fancy he will not have much difficulty -- but that
the Papacy inflamed the Catholic Poles against Russia is patent.
The Poles had, we saw, very strong traditional grounds to hate
Tsarist Russia, and Pilsudski had carried his hatred over to Soviet
Russia and had gravely implicated the Roman Catholics in Russia in
the White War and subsequent conspiracies. Grave difficulties were
bound to arise when there was a common frontier between the most
religious and the most irreligious country in Europe. It will,
however, not be questioned that these difficulties were immensely
aggravated by the appeals to the Catholic world of the Papacy to
work for the extinction of Bolshevism after 1926. It was in large
part owing to this that the democracies lost the last opportunity
of either preventing the war or making it short and restricted.




                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               23

                   THE WAR AND PAPAL INTRIGUE

     Poland had signed a non-aggression pact with Germany in 1934,
and there cannot be the least doubt that, imbued as it was with the
Pope's idea of a crusade against Russia, in which Germany must play
at least the leading part, Poland regarded this as a preparatory
condition for the eventual attack on Russia. When Hitler and
Mussolini had hamstrung Czecho-Slovakia, Catholic Poland and
Catholic Hungary had, like wolves waiting until a buffalo is
wounded, bitten large pieces of territory out of its flanks. On
January 25, 1939, Hitler had sent Ribbentrop, the vilest agent of
his more treacherous moves, to Warsaw to represent Germany at the
celebration of the fifth anniversary of the non-aggression pact. It
was, he said in his speech, "one of the firmest bases of European
peace." What children these Europeans were the historian will one
day reflect! Germany was then, he knew, plotting the destruction of
Poland and a world war.

     Ribbentrop returned to Germany to join in the plot against
Czecho-Slovakia in which, as I have elsewhere explained, it
received most valuable help from the Black International. The
Germans entered Prague on March 15 (1939), while the new Pope was
preparing his moving address on peace and charity; and the world
began to prepare for what seemed to be the inevitable war. Most of
my neighbors in London had gas-masks by that date and looked
forward with amazing apathy -- or was it lack of imagination? -- to
the horrors that were predicted. The French signed a mutual
defensive alliance with Poland. In fact, in the course of the next
few months France and Great Britain had such alliances also with
Rumania, Greece, and Turkey.

     We can imagine some imperfectly informed reader of the next
generation exclaiming impatiently: But why string together these
small, scattered, and not wholly reliable nations and omit the one
great power, Soviet Russia, which was Germany's natural enemy and
was worth all the others put together? We did not ask the question
at the time because we knew the answer. These Catholic countries
and even Great Britain regarded an approach to Russia much as a
Baptist mothers meeting would regard a suggestion, in case of need,
to call in the aid of a gunman to protect their virtue. For that
the Pope had a very large part of the responsibility.

     Naturally there were approaches, of a sort. The French signed
a pact with Russia, almost useless because it did not include a
military alliance, in April. The Vatican promptly condemned it. The
British asked Russia to promise military aid to Poland and Rumania,
but only in such form and measure as those powers decided, and they
would not promise British aid to Russia if it was attacked. Russia,
sore about the insulting exclusion from Munich, rightly distrusting
a Britain which, it knew, regarded it as an outlaw, refused. Poland
refused to have adequate Russian armies in it, and the little
Baltic states, prizes set up by Versailles for the first grabber,
also refused. Great Britain half-heatedly pushed on. It sent a
diplomatic mission, of a character it would not send to any other
country, to Moscow, then a military mission of the same inferior
quality. Russia did not need to read how one of the Blimps of a
London club had said: "We may, of course, have to get Russia to
help, but, please God it will not come to that." It, in August 23,
sent the old women of the clubs into hysterics by announcing that 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               24

                   THE WAR AND PAPAL INTRIGUE

it had signed a non-aggression pact with Germany. A few weeks later
it sent the Nazis into what we might call a subdued hysteria by
snatching the Galician Ukraine -- for reasons which I have surely
fully explained -- from under their guns.

     We quite understand Russia. We also now understand Poland,
which entered upon its three-years war-agony on September 1st, and
its three-years peace-agony a few weeks later. Only one feature in
that year of tragic blunders concerns us here. Poland, which
thought it had been following the luminous lead of the Church for
so many years, had been led by the nose. The brave, exploited,
perversely educated people had been cursed with blundering leaders
who were in closer alliance with the Church than leaders were in
any other Catholic country. They had brought upon the land the
contempt of Europe and had made it refuse the aid of the big
brother who, with real aid from the British and French fleets,
Rumania, Yugoslavia, and Greece might have averted its tragic fate.
The poles paid for their piety. Little did the French dream that
they also, the least religious people in Europe after the Russians,
Would soon be led by the Black International, and without the
redeeming trait of honor and bravery which we accord to the Poles,
into same black pit. Never was there before such lack of   
foresight in an age of mortal danger. We know why the statesmen and
churchmen of democratic countries were reluctant to face realities.
Hitler and Mussolini and their satellite promised to kill
Socialism. Would the catastrophe have been as grave if the peoples
of the world had had all the facts candidly before them?



                           Chapter IV


                  THE GERMAN CHURCH AND THE WAR


     On September 1st, 1939, began, with the invasion of Poland,
the greatest war, it maybe the most terrible and tragic three-year
period, in the whole of history. The aggression-mongers, the Pope's 
biographer affirms, thrust him aside and excluded him from their
counsels. "When the swords flash let the lawyers be silent" said an
old Roman proverb. The new Roman applied it to churchmen: Mussolini
assured the Pope that he would see that Rome was respected as a
sacred city, and, although Italian planes have taken part in the
foul bombing of London, Rome has never been bombed. Churchill
persistently refuses to tell why. Perhaps the Catholic authorities
of the United States and the British Empire could tell us. The
Pope, to make doubly sure that he would remain out of heaven some
years longer, had a luxurious shelter prepared under an ancient
tower with walls fifteen feet thick. Germany would not require his
services again until the attack on Belgium and France.

     A pathetic spectacle for the moral ruler of the world! If he
had been the austere world-figure that Catholic literature
represents him -- nay, if he had been a man -- what would he have
done? He would certainly not have been content, as he was to ask
the nations of the world, as if they were equally guilty, to make 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               15

                   THE WAR AND PAPAL INTRIGUE

peace: certainly not have proposed economic conferences, as he did,
to make the aggressive powers still stronger by conceding territory
for which they need not expend any of their forces. Indeed, the
whole world knew at that time that only one nation threatened its
peace, Germany. The Italian and Japanese jackals would not move
until the lion had scattered a few corpses about the landscape. So
the Pope's function, unless America apologetic literature is
admitted to be insincere, was clear. He ought to have branded as
criminal in the highest degree the ambition to annex and exploit
other countries, one by one, of which Germany had given ample
proof. He ought to have condemned in the most explicit and severest
terms the glorification of war by the German and Italian leaders,
the lies they put forward about encirclement and over-population,
the racial arrogance with which they were poisoning their people,
the murderous outrages with which they had begun to say to all the
little nations of Europe: See what you will get if you resist us.

     It is hardly worthwhile discussing the immediate pretexts of
the opening of hostilities. For my part -- I have never hesitated
to say that Dantzig was a German city and ought never to have been
taken from it, and that to take from it a slice of East Prussia
measuring 260 miles by 80 to give the Poles -- Polish capitalists
and French bond-holders, that is to say -- a "Corridor" to the sea
was little less monstrous. But no one in Europe expected Germany to
be satisfied with these. The situation was as clear as the Eiffel
Tower at Paris. Germany meant to take Poland, and England and
France were sworn to regard such a step as proof of a large
aggressive design and declare war. Those of us who knew the facts
reflected, sadly, that the democracies could hardly choose a weaker
case to champion than that of the synthetic Poland they had set up
at Versailles, the Fascist state which had bludgeoned its
minorities for twenty years. It was all the worse that, as was soon
proved, they could give no help to Poland and were not even able to
help themselves.

     The very difficult and still obscure question of France
require's a separate book but I can speak for England. About mid-
day on that fateful Sunday the news was broadcast that Chamberlain
had declared war on Germany. By an extraordinary blunder the sirens
wailed within half an hour and, to make matters worse in my own
street, a stupid warden gave the signal to prepare for gas. I will
not describe the panic -- which does not detract from the fine
courage of most Londoners when the blow fell later -- but it
reminded us of one thing: we had no armament whatever for the war
we had declared. It has since transpired that England then had only
18 good fighter planes. Germany had thousands. Nine months
preparation had done little more than give most of us gas-masks --
I had none -- accommodations for a million or so in the hospitals
and coffins for hundreds of thousands. Yet for once Englishmen
might be proud of the folly of their government. It cried a halt to
brutality and criminal greed.

     And the Pope had nothing to say. Someone ought to collect a
bouquet, or encyclopedia, of all the impressive assurances of
American Catholic apologists that their Pope is the ideal
inflexible, international and irrepressible arbiter of right and
wrong, justice and injustice. Of all the excuses that they bleat 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               16

                   THE WAR AND PAPAL INTRIGUE

today the funniest -- and even bishop's mumble it -- is that he is
the Father of All Peoples and must not take sides! We had been told
that it was just that position of cosmopolitan and international
judge which made him a unique and incorruptible tribunal. Was there
some doubt from the moral point of view on which side the guilt
lay? Can one even imagine Britain and France, with their miserable
armament, having any other aim than to cheek a brutal
aggressiveness? In plain English, and in the light of the Pope's
own words, this plea means that he would not denounce a wrong if
his interests and those of his Black International were to suffer
for it in any country. And that is the gist of our accusation. The
Black International pursues its own interests though it be through
the ruin of civilization and of all human idealism.

     As I have repeatedly pointed out, it is rather this Black
International than the Pope that interests us. We must not allow
ourselves to be distracted when the end comes by Catholic or any
other criticisms of Eugenio Pacelli. Any Pope would have acted as
he did. No Pope ever acted otherwise. The great French scholar, A.
Loisy, scourged the Pope during the last war for exactly the same
conduct. And the apologist has not simply to explain way his
"neutrality," though that is a vice in a moralist in face of a
grave crime. He had helped bring on the war. He had made it easy
for Hitler the annexation of Austria. He had cooperated with him
still more closely in the destruction of Czecho-Slovakia. He had
turned a blind eye to his vile conduct in Germany and helped to
protect his intervention in Spain. He had been in large part
responsible for the weakness and incoherence of the world-
opposition to him by his preaching of hatred of Russia -- and --
not to speak of matters which will be discussed in later booklets
-- he had encouraged his monstrous plans by allying himself with
the two other powers which had similar plans.

     But when we say that the Pope was silent we mean only that no
clear messages were printed in the Osservatore or broadcast from
the Vatican Radio or sent out to the world in encyclicals. His one
encyclical at this time, when the flames of war were lit from
Poland to England, was, as we saw, a plea that the world, not one
or two nations, was evil because it was losing religion, and
Catholic Action must come to the rescue. Catholic Action! It had
been busy in the Polish Ukraine for twenty years, in Spain for
Several years, in Hungary and Portugal, in Austria and South
America. No one took any notice.

     Was the Pope acting through the German hierarchy? We do not
care two pins whether this can or cannot be proved. One thing we do
know as we have already seen. The summer had seen "feverish
activity" at the Vatican, and an outstanding part of this was
correspondence with the Nuncios at Berlin, Warsaw, and Paris and
the reception of German and Polish bishops. As the whole world was
now discussing the chances of preparing for an invasion of Poland
and a general war we shall hardly be accused of undue
suspiciousness's if we suggest that this was the chief topic of the
very busy correspondence and interviews. What was decided we do not
know. The most sensible theory in view of the facts is that Hitler
informed the Vatican that he was taking over Poland, peacefully, as



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               27

                   THE WAR AND PAPAL INTRIGUE

the first step in a campaign against Russia, promised to turn over
a new leaf in Germany, and wanted the Pope to keep France out of
it; and that the Poles, not being as trustful as the Pope rejected
his advice to submit.

     However that may be, he must have had an understanding with
the German hierarchy, and we know how it behaved. lt was as
Hitlerite as the Hitler youth. Edith Moore quotes a number of the
pronouncements of the German bishops in her No Friend of Democracy
(1941). The very sound and impartial Manchester Guardian (May 24,
1940) thus stated the position:

     "Among the higher ranks of the Catholic clergy a decisive
majority desire to see the victory of the Reich or at least a peace
that will leave Germany's political and military strength
unimpaired. At the same time they still look to an eventual
Catholic-Conservative restoration. The National Socialist State
has, it seems, been able to reach an understanding with the
Catholic leaders. Assurances have been given as to the status of
the Church in the Bohemian-Moravian Protectorate and in Germany
itself. The special position of the Catholic Church in Poland is
also to receive due recognition. In spite of the persecution of
laymen and priests by the Nazis, in spite of all the attacks upon
the Christian religion now hopes have been raised among the German
Catholics as a result of these negotiations."

     As I suggested, the hierarchy -- and the references to Bohemia
and Poland seem to bring in the Vatican -- was soothed with
promises of greater advantages to the Church and in view of these
saw nothing of the enormity of the annexation of Norway, Denmark,
and Holland which had then taken place. On August 22 the bishops
held their annual meeting at Fulda, a  national shrine from which
they were accustomed to give guidance to their Church. Usually only
a score of bishops attended, but this year the whole 45 were
present, and, according to the German press, the advice they gave
to the faithful was a very emphatic "Heil Hitler." By this time, I
may recall, the German army had swept over Holland, Belgium, and
France and, exasperated by the opposition of those countries, had
stooped to outrages and infamies which shocked the world. Yet the
German papers revealed that the bishops decided that "after the
completion of the final German victory special ceremonies of
gratitude to the German troops and of loyalty to Hitler will be
announced." It was said that the bishops submitted their proposals
to the Vatican and that the Pope who was at the time bargaining
once more with Hitler (Catholic Herald, August 9, 1940, and
Catholic Tablet, September 21, 1940), forbade them to publish their
resolutions: clearly to avoid scandal in Britain and America.

     The Tablet found a significance in the fact the final address
at the Fulda Conference was given by the bishop of Osnabruck, who
was appointed by Goering the representative of the Catholic Church
in the Prussian State Council, and the New York Times reported that
"the leaders of the Catholics in Germany . . . exhort their
believer's in and outside the Reich to do their utmost in the
righteous cause of the German nation under the leadership of
Chancellor Hitler." The hierarchy, in other words, did not merely
urge Catholics to support Hitler, but went out of their way to 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               28

                   THE WAR AND PAPAL INTRIGUE

affirm that the miserable bandit had "a righteous cause." A British
Catholic paper, the Herald (October 18, 1940) quoted a passage from
a Pastoral Letter which the chief Catholic chaplain, Bishop
Garkowsky, addressed to all Catholics in the Army, Navy, and Air
Force. He said:

     "The German people have a clear conscience and are aware which
people will have to bear the responsibility before God and history
for the gigantic struggle that is now going on. The German people
know who primarily started this war. Just as certainly as God is
the Father of all Peoples, He is also the judge of right and wrong,
of honor and deceit."

     Those who find it possible to imagine that these German
bishops honestly blamed Britain and France for the war because,
after a reiterated solemn warning, they had declared that they
would oppose further aggression may do so. I would not argue the
matter. Most of us can see nothing but nauseous hypocrisy in German
prelates who invoke God as a witness to the righteousness of the
Nazi cause and program.

     We have already seen that the new Pope had, a year before,
issued an Encyclical, Summi Potitificatus, on the state of the
world it was very wicked because the nations had lost the Christian
sense of brotherhood -- so conspicuous, of course, in the
nineteenth century and earlier -- and had adopted theories of
racial superiority. Even Catholics in England and France were very
uneasy in commenting on this. Could the Pope possibly mean that the
democracies were at least so close to the dictatorships in these
respects that he was not called upon to draw any distinction? And
why did he not say that he meant Germany, Italy, and Japan? One
French Catholic writer evaded the difficulty by saying that "in
time of war the Church of Rome has to observe an impartial
reserve." The same writer said, incidently, that in no other war in
history was good so clearly on one side and evil on the other. The
Pope was just a moral coward, and a consequence of his cowardice is
seen in these quotations from the German bishops. Their stern
inexorable moral guide left them free to tell people that the
vilest campaign in modern history, both in its aim and in its
procedure, had the full approval of the Black International and
their God.

     But the cordiality between the butchers and the black-cassocks
was never long maintained in its purity. Hitler, who seems to have
regarded the complaisance of the hierarchy and the Vatican with
complete cynicism, threatened a new blow at the Church in the
Spring of 1941. He returned to the ideas of Mein Kampf and said
that both Protestant and Catholic Churches must be blended in one
Christian body which must be strictly "national" or independent of
Roman authority and adapted in its moral teaching to Nazi ideas.
The Pope's spokesman on the Vatican Radio now discovered some moral
courage -- not in excess, it is true -- and summoned German
Catholics to "wake up and see clearly the pagan tendencies which
were spreading everywhere." The sordid behavior of the Gestapo and
the soldiers in half of Europe -- in the concentration camp's of
Germany itself, in Austria and Bohemia, and now in Norway, Holland,
Belgium, and Occupied France must not be censured except where 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               29

                   THE WAR AND PAPAL INTRIGUE

Russia can be made to bear the greater part of the censure. The
bloody ruling of this intoxicated blonde beast over Europe must be
viewed with "impartial reserve." But to tamper with the Church and
the interest of the Vatican . . . And still the hierarchy supported
the war. The Archbishop of Freiburg, who had denounced the plot to
the Vatican, added:

     "Far be it from me in this terrible struggle to say anything
that would turn aside the energies of the people or prejudice their
devotion to their country. Everyone who thinks as a German desires
to secure for his country a lasting peace with honor."

     With honor! There's the rub. It was left to Hitler, Goering,
Goebbel's, Ribbentrop, and Himmler to interpret the phrase. They
smiled and pushed ahead, and we shall later find them again
courting the Vatican.

     When Eugenio Pacelli became Pope in 1939 he had to choose a
coat of arms and a motto. He chose a dove with an olive-branch in
its beak and the words "Peace in Justice"! He had by his ten years
of inflaming passion against and libelling Russia, to his unctious
benediction of corruption in Spain and Austria, by his intrigues in
Czecho-Slovakia, and especially by standing out before the world as
the friend of Germany, Italy, and Japan, helped to make the world
war inevitable. He dare not, even when the raw greed of Hitler and
Mussolini was flaunted before his eyes, say one word in
condemnation of it; and the local regiments of the Black
International which he controlled sanctified every outrage and
egged on the German people in the most criminal aggression and most
savage behavior that the world had seen for many centuries. And his
supreme word of guidance was that the world was very wicked because
it would not listen to religious oracles.


                          ****     ****


    Reproducible Electronic Publishing can defeat censorship.


   The Bank of Wisdom is a collection of the most thoughtful,
scholarly and factual books. These computer books are reprints of
suppressed books and will cover American and world history; the
Biographies and writings of famous persons, and especially of our
nations Founding Fathers. They will include philosophy and
religion. all these subjects, and more, will be made available to
the public in electronic form, easily copied and distributed, so
that America can again become what its Founders intended --

                 The Free Market-Place of Ideas.

   The Bank of Wisdom is always looking for more of these old,
hidden, suppressed and forgotten books that contain needed facts
and information for today. If you have such books please contact
us, we need to give them back to America.

                          ****     ****


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               30




                        29 page printout
    Reproducible Electronic Publishing can defeat censorship.

          This file, its printout, or copies of either
          are to be copied and given away, but NOT sold.

          Bank of Wisdom, Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                          ****     ****

Edited by E. Haldeman-Julius

THE BLACK INTERNATIONAL                 No. 7

            THE PIOUS TRAITORS OF BELGIUM AND FRANCE

             HOW THE PREACHING OF PEACE FIZZLED OUT,
                             AND WHY

                        by Joseph McCabe


                  HALDEMAN-JULIUS PUBLICATIONS
                     GIRARD  -- : --  KANSAS


                          ****     ****


   CHAPTER

     I    The War in the West ................................ 1

    II    Norway "Not a Catholic Country" .................... 8

   III    The Treachery of Leopold ........................... 14

    IV    France Recovers its Faith and Losses its Honor ..... 19

     V    The Amazing Folly of the Catholic Bloc .............. 25


                          ****     ****

                            Chapter I

                       THE WAR IN THE WEST

     Those of us who know the ways of Popes watch our papers
cynically for the first signs of a change of heart in Immutable
Rome. In the first year of a war the Pope is on the side of the big
battalions, or, in the language of modern war, the Panzer
divisions. How could a nation like Great Britain expect a Pope to
declare its cause just if it had only a score of good fighting
planes and hundreds of thousands of hospital beds and coffins ready
when it launched its thunderbolt? In the second year the Pope
becomes the Great Neutral, very eloquent in telling the virtues of
peace to a world which hardly needs that assurance. In the third
year he becomes the Arbiter of Right and Wrong. He find's that
there are limits to the world's leniency and the Catholic layman's
docility.


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               1

            THE PIOUS TRAITORS OF BELGIUM AND FRANCE

     The time has come for the third phase. The German system is
ominously stretched, and expert ears listen for the first crack. 
Italy, disillusioned and beggared, would hang out its tattered
flags if it heard of the death of Mussolini and Hitler. Japan sees
the great American fleet looming on the horizon. All the little
parasite dictators and Quislings tremble in their dishonored homes.
Through the world surges the first flush of confidence in three
years . . . So we begin to hear strange things from those spokesmen
of the Vatican -- the Radio, the Osservatore, and the publicity
bureau -- which can be quoted later as evidence of the Pope's
sentiments or lightly dismissed as "unauthorized," as the
circumstances require.

     The latest to hand reminds us how in a world which permits
Catholics to intrigue in every newspaper office and every political
lobby the Pope can command respectful attention for any
eccentricity, audacity, or mendacity he cares to perpetrate. Myron
C. Taylor, whose secret proceedings under cover of his unofficial
office the American public might find it interesting to
investigate, recently spent a week in Lisbon on his way from the
Pope to the President. Under the devout dictator Salazar Lisbon,
not many years ago a great Liberal center, has become an important
international outpost of the Vatican. Representatives of Spain,
Vichy France, Germany, and the Church breathe its air with lordly
freedom. It was, therefore, not very surprising that shortly after
Mr. Taylor's departure the London Times had this paragraph, which
a British writer welcomed with the reminder that "good hearty
laughs are hard to come by in these days," from its Lisbon
correspondent:

     "High ecclesiastical sources throw one clear ray of light on
the Pope's attitude to the war. His Holiness in private episcopal
audiences has drawn an important distinction between the Nazi and
Communist systems. His public discourses have implied the obvious
truth that the philosophy behind each is fundamentally anti-
Christian, but in private he has repeatedly said that, whereas
Nazism is almost entirely evil in its inspiration, Communism has in
it certain elements of natural good which, even if utterly
perverted, still exist. Bolshevism is in some sense a corruption of
the virtues of brotherly love and self-sacrifice, whereas Nazism is
a direct and untrammelled manifestation of hatred and greed."

     I venture to think that if the reader has not seen that
passage before but has read some books of this series it leaves him
breathless. By comparison the passage in which the Archbishop of
York tried a week later to emulate his Brother in Christ seems
almost rational. He said:

     "So far as I understand the economic system of Russia, as it
was when the invasion began, I see little or nothing in it with
which a Christian needs to quarrel" (London Evening News, November
13).

     If we had not the Pope's words (alleged) to compare with this
we should call it a luscious example of the kind of thing that
bishops alone are permitted to say. The essential aim and operation
of the Russian economic system is to share the wealth which the
people of Russia produce, without one iota of exploitation of 

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               2

            THE PIOUS TRAITORS OF BELGIUM AND FRANCE

colonies or subject nations, amongst the producers, and with
immeasurably stricter justice than could be found in Britain or
anywhere else; and Dr. Temple, who has paid attention to the ethic
of social and economic arrangements for thirty years, ought to know
it.

     But his boldness in suggesting that it is not quite on the
Christian level pales beside that of the Pope. For years Pacelli-
Pius has showered upon the entire Russian system every epithet that
a man in his position is supposed to know. In a comprehensive word
it is "satanic." The Catholic world was taught to close its eyes
and shudder at the word Bolshevism and to regard the Nazis as the
Teutonic Knight whom God had chosen to destroy it. Now we are asked
to believe that while in public the Pope merely pointed out the
"obvious truth" that both systems are anti-Christian in private he
always acknowledged that Bolshevism was perverted virtue -- that is
to say, virtue without a Catholic basis -- and Nazism unreservedly
corrupt.

     I need not point out to my readers that this is false. The
language which the Vatican has used about Bolshevism for years,
much of which I have quoted, condemned it vitriolically, on moral
and social grounds, as destructive of the social order and of
civilization, productive of vice, and stifling to personality. It
was almost the only justification of his eight years' courtship of
Germany and his silence while the entire German Catholic Church
applauded those "victories" of the Nazis, which the Pope is now
said to have regarded always as successes of greed and hatred, that
one day they would destroy Bolshevism and so save civilization.
That there is no other country in the world in which the Pope's
alleged ideals -- Peace, Charity, and Justice -- have been more
cherished and carried out in practice than in Russia I will show in
a booklet on the Vatican's relations to that country. But there is
a growing acknowledgment today that it is the classic land of
"brotherly love and Self-sacrifice." What shall we say of this
moral oracle of 200,000,000 people who, when he is supposed to be
correcting an earlier estimate of Russia, still puts it on a lower
level than Italy, Spain, Portugal, or Brazil?

     If we were to accept this Lisbon report of the Pope's words as
genuine most of us would reflect, with a shrug of the shoulders,
that what these high ecclesiastical authorities say seems to be of
no interest to us common folk with our simple notions of
truthfulness and plain speech. On the other hand, since we must at
least regard it as a move on the part of the Black International we
should say that it will make Goebbels look to his laurels. From
1917 to 1924, while the rest of the world cursed Russia, the
Vatican courted it. From 1926 to 1941 when Russia emerged from the
raw conditions of the civil war and the famine and won increasing
respect, the Vatican cursed it and called for its destruction. Now
that Catholic armies unite with the armies, of "hatred and greed"
to destroy it the Roman Church puts out tentative suggestions of a
return to the early courtship. It is one of a hundred indications
given in these books that the Black International has only one aim
-- the recovery or enlargement of its wealth and power -- and one
code of action, the ecclesiastical code. All this talk about social
interests and the cause of civilization is eyewash.


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               3

            THE PIOUS TRAITORS OF BELGIUM AND FRANCE

     Can we suppose that, as will probably be said presently,
recent events have opened the eye's of the Pope? What events? Has
something happened recently that is worse than the ruin of Spain,
Austria, Abyssinia, Czecho-Slovakia, Albania, Poland, Norway,
Denmark, Holland, Belgium, and France? Remember that in not one
single instance of these exhibitions of greed and sadistic cruelty
has the Pope said that that was their character. Half of this
foulness had been perpetrated before the end of 1939 yet the Pope
just then elected to pay Mussolini's royal vassal and spy, the King
of Italy, more gorgeous compliments than any Pope had paid in Rome
since Italy began to have Kings. In the Christmas season the king
and queen -- probably wearing the Golden Rose he had given her as
Empress of Abyssinia -- had visited him, with rich presents, in the
Vatican. A few days later, not in compliance with Papal custom but
defying all precedent in his anxiety to do honor to the degraded
pair, he travelled across Rome to the Quirinal and exchanged the
most cordial Christmas greetings and compliments in the opulent
throne-room of the palace.

     At that time, in pursuance of a policy jointly agreed upon
between Germany and Italy, the Poles and Polish Jews were writhing,
half-starved, bloodily scourged, amidst the ruins of their homes.
The Pope knew it. He proved repeatedly daring 1940 that in spite of
all German efforts to cut his communications with the country, he
continued to receive, doubtless through Swedish Catholics, news
from Poland! We remember his warm protest when, in 1940, German
soldiers and Gestapo men began, under official orders, to castrate
them by the thousand's. You surely remember how the Vatican
protested that the operation was not in accord with Catholic
theology!

     And just about that time the First Murderer came in for his
share of the compliments. The Vatican Radio announced joyously that
one of the vilest of the Nazi group, Ribbentrop, a man for whom the
aristocratic Pope must have felt a personal as well as moral
repugnance, was coming to visit the Pope, and, as I show elsewhere,
there was a month of hard bargaining, although Hitler met Mussolini
a few days after Ribbentrop's visit and they decided upon and began
the enslavement of the entirely innocent democracies of Norway,
Denmark, Holland, and Belgium. We will consider later whether the
plot was communicated to the Pope like those of the Irish and the
Spanish rebellions, but it went through with all its savagery
whether he agreed or no, and the Huns were already making a vast
shambles of the roads of France when the Pope "extended his
paternal love to the German and Allied armies." It is said even
that he did not use the word Allied but Vatican officials felt that
it was expedient to add it.

     We shall come later to discuss the very difficult question of
the relation of the Black International to the betrayal of Belgium
and France. Let us first get quite clear the fact that, whatever
Pius XII knew in advance about the German program -- there is high
authority for saying that Ribbentrop told him of it -- the
execution of which he never condemned, there is no question
whatever of his being ignorant at that time of the motives, and the
men. When he enjoyed a royal reception at Budapest in 1938 he
recalled according to a profoundly admiring Catholic writer in the
British Quarterly Review (January, 1940, p. 109), some words of 
Pope Pius XI:
                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               4

            THE PIOUS TRAITORS OF BELGIUM AND FRANCE

     "I thank God day by day that he has made me live in this time
. . . good and evil are locked in a gigantic struggle, and nobody
has the right to be merely an onlooker at this momentous hour."

     Strange language for the Great Neutral! But what was the
struggle at that time, and what was Pacelli's contribution?

     The struggle which the Pope envisaged in 1938 was not the
traditional struggle of religion and irreligion, virtue and vice.
That had, from the clerical angle, continued for decades and not
suddenly became "gigantic"! The symptoms of a new and formidable
struggle were the brutal destruction of the liberty of Spain by
rebels, mercenaries, Nazis, and Fascists: the destruction of the
liberty of Austria: the destruction of the lives and property of
tens of million's of Chinese: and the destruction of liberty in
most of the Republics of South America. These were all parts of one
struggle; the attempt of privilege and power to crush new liberties
that had been won and extinguish new claims of justice. We know
well on which side the Pope was. For him it was a struggle of
Bolshevism and Authority, and no group of bankers or corrupt
politicians had been more willing than he to enlist the services of
these new forces which called themselves Nazism and Fascism. But
was their evil character, their motivation in hatred and greed,
hidden from him?

     He was crowned Pope, as I said, on March 12, 1939. Fifty
princes of royal blood, Catholics boast, stood round his throne on
the balcony outside St. Peter's when the tiara was put upon his
head with the usual formula, very fittingly spoken in a dead
language:

     "Receive this tiara of three crown and know that you are the
Father of Princes and Kings, the Governor of the Earth, the Vicar
of Our Savior Jesus Christ."

     American papers, in the accounts sent by their Catholic
correspondents, smilingly explained away this Father-of-Kings and
Governor-of-the-Earth business. A quaint old Roman fashion of
speaking. It certainly was not to Pius XII and the field-marshals
of the Black International who surrounded him as he sat, tall,
straight, emaciated, his large black eyes shining in his long
olivetinted face. They had awarded him the crown precisely because
he believed this -- because he was a churchman who would, as the
Jeromes and Bernards of old had commanded, walk over the body of
his mother to do his clerical duty. And no other cardinal knew the
world he was to govern as well as he did. Catholic writers boast
that he read the chief papers daily of Italy, Spain, Portugal,
Germany, France, England, and South America: which probably means
that he read all the passages blue-pencilled by secretaries. He had
lived twelve years in Germany and had travelled in twenty
countries.

     It is nonsense to pretend that he did not know the real
character of his allies, the Nazis, Fascists, semi-Fascists, and
the greedy Japs; and whether it be true or false that in October,
1941, he authorized the statement that he had always recognized
this foul character, we want to know -- not as a matter of 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               5

            THE PIOUS TRAITORS OF BELGIUM AND FRANCE

curiosity but because it is a vital point in our indictment of the
Black International -- why not a single word of this kind, not a
single warning to the world about the nature of the forces that
were preparing to enslave it, was uttered before October, 1941, if
it was even then uttered. It was not possible for an honest man to
doubt that character after 1939: to profess a doubt any time after
the summer of 1940 required the peculiar heroism of a Lindbergh or
a De Valera. The facts are known but let me, for a reason which
will appear in a moment, quote this passage from the authentic
account by a British soldier of what he saw in Belgium in 1940. He
was taken prisoner and like tens of thousands of other prisoners
had to walk afoot to a camp hundreds of miles away because the
trains eastward were wanted for wounded, for officers returning to
carouse, and for their immense quantities of loot. The guards had
whips and laid them upon the captives "whenever they felt like it,
just to show us and the Belgians who was boss." Any captive who
accepted an apple or a bit of bread -- they were starving -- from
a Belgian was shot or bayonetted. He goes on:

     "Sometimes they'd make us run through the villages holding our
hands above our heads, cracking the whip all round the column. They
gave us no food. They were shooting all the time, for sport and to
show off, at anything that happened to be about -- cats, dogs,
hens, men, and women -- anything that came handy, and they were
hitting right in the head every time. After they'd shot a man
they'd pat their Tommy-gun affectionately and wink at us. They
treated the old women and children worse than they did us . . .
These soldiers were all young ones. The older soldiers, who'd seen
the last war, were different -- less like crafty wild animals --
much more human altogether, and they don't seem to get the gangster
idea of warfare."

     So they had acted in Poland, the Italians in Abyssinia, and
soldiers and airmen of both armies in Spain; and this repulsive
blend of civilized savagery and looting was fouling eight countries
in Europe at the time when the Pope "extended his paternal love" to
the German soldiers and Cardinal Schuster visited barracks in Italy
and "distributed blessed medals to bring luck to the Italian
armies."

     The point I wish to make clear here is that the Pope, like
every bishop and priest in Germany, had known for years that the
men were being trained for precisely this kind of "warfare," and it
would be preposterous to ask us to believe that his eyes were first
opened in the year 1941. Notice in the above passage the
distinction between the young and the old soldiers. It was
customary in the last war to call the Germans "the Huns." While
pointing out that it was the Kaiser who stupidly gave occasion for
this by telling his men, when he sent an expedition to China, to
"behave like Hun's". I never used the word; though, as the
Kolnische Zeitung itself mildly observed, they had done "many
regrettable things" in Belgium. The German military order of
Schrecklichkeit (intimidation) naturally led to such things. But
there had been a far more serious corruption of the German mind,
especially of German youth, from 1933 to 1939, in preparation for
the present war, and any man who suggests that Pacelli was not
thoroughly acquainted with a system of debasement which was 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               6

            THE PIOUS TRAITORS OF BELGIUM AND FRANCE

described with disgust by educationists and sociologists in every
country must mean that his vaunted knowledge of German and Germany
or his deep interest in the world's welfare and the causes of war
are mythical. Dorothy Thompson and others described it (in Assault
on Civilization) as early as 1934, see Prof. Schuman: Hitler and
the Nazi Dictatorship (1936) and other American works. It is
needless to say that it incurred no censures for the Black
International throughout Germany, which continued to woo Hitler,
the arch-corruptor.

     Its basic principle was Hitler's declaration (the title of the
last chapter of Mein Kampf), "What is Necessary is Right", which
Rosenberg expressed as, "Right is what Aryans consider Right."
Since these new moral legislators had by 1933 the fully developed
idea of an Aryan conquest and exploitation of Europe and for this
a vast and completely ruthless army was "necessary", they
immediately converted the entire educational system -- in the
broader as well as the narrower sense -- into a scheme for making
callous fighters. The training began in the cradle. Every German
female capable of child-bearing was to bear -- in time government
officials said publicly that it did not matter if she was not
married -- and was to make her children war-minded as soon as
possible. One fool, the kind of fool whose writings the Nazi Party
subsidized, told the mother to watch eagerly for the first gleam of
the starlight of battle in the little Aryan eyes. Hitler himself
ordered mothers to talk war and choose war-toys "until the brain of
the smallest child glows with the prayer: God Bless our weapons."
The boy not yet in his teens swaggered about with "Blood and Honor"
on his knife and learned to shout as early as possible because, as
one educationist said, shooting makes a youth "calm and cold-
blooded". In school he chanted with his little pals: "We were born
to die for Germany."

     It was far worse in the secondary (high) school the course
which began at an earlier age than in any other country. For six or
seven years boys and girls were drenched with the vilest Nazi
sentiments Science was little more than a perversion of the
teaching of genetics to instil racial pride and selfishness. The
whole curriculum, such as it was -- Hitler turned educationist and
said the aim was to "make bodies sound to the core" -- was
prostituted. So rapid was the debasement of education that in a
list of 28 countries in the Year Book of Education in 1938 Germany
was fourth from the bottom. Hundreds of thousands of youth's
trained in these, schools are in the army today -- or dead -- for
they are accepted, if strong, from the age of 17, and 700,000 will
pass to the army, submarines, and Luftwaffe in January, 1942. But
this intensive training in Nazi aims is not enough. Hundreds of
thousands of both sexes were selected for special free maintenance
and training in the Castles of the New Social Order (age 15 to 25),
Adolph Hitler Schools, Napoli (National Political) Schools. Here
the future Gestapo and male and female agent's, for home or abroad
received perfect physical training and what must frankly be called
a training in callousness and brutality. In the universities the
old type of professor was extinguished or, in too many cases,
turned into a hypocrite. Nazi youths of the most brazen type ruled
the classrooms and the lecturers.



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               7

            THE PIOUS TRAITORS OF BELGIUM AND FRANCE

     Education in the broader sense -- the whole environment for
communicating ideas or sentiments -- was equally captured and
debased. Everything -- books (authors, publishers, and book
sellers), the press, radio, the theater, concerts, all lectures,
pageants, etc., down to village dances -- came under a Kultur
Kammer with Goebbels as President and a colossal staff and
representatives in every village. Prizes were offered for the best
-- most hysterically Nazi -- books, and the callowest youths became
great writers. One man composed a Lord's Prayer to Hitler. An
aristocrat, Ritter von Taub, edited a Book of Popular Songs
including monstrous hymns to Hitler. It is enough to recall a line
of the famous "Horst Wessel Song: "How high Horst Wessel towers
above Jesus of Nazareth". The youth, a vile character, had lived on
the earnings of a whore -- but he had been heroically callous and
brutal.

     This drenching of the mind of Germany for six years before the
war, the most massive and effective illustration possible of the
truth of the modern science of social psychology -- that there is
no "mind" or "character' other than the sum of what such influences
as I have described put into a child or man -- has been well known
for years to every educationist and moralist in the world, and
certainly to every priest in Germany. And education was the same
during all these years, if less ably controlled, in Italy and
Japan, the other countries allied with the Vatican, I still wait to
hear of a Catholic apologist who wall claim that Pacelli-Pius was
not acquainted with it.



                           Chapter II


                 NORWAY "NOT A CATHOLIC COUNTRY"


     These were the men, these dynamic automata of a thoroughly
depraved force, whom the Pope saw set out, with the blessing of the
German hierarchy, in the spring of 1940 for the speedy conquest and
looting of western Europe and (they thought) the reduction of
England by a ruthless massacre of its citizens, as a necessary part
of the preparation for that campaign against Russia which the Pope
so passionately desired. How far this was the condition of the
German people generally does not properly concern me here but the
reader may care to hear what impression in this regard a very
extensive and varied literature has left on my mind. Let me point
out first that the account of German miseducation which I have
given relieves us from accepting the worst estimates of the
character of the German people. That they are a tainted stock and
must be treated accordingly is pseudo-scientific rubbish. Such
sentiments as the above were during many years before 1932 confined
to a miserable minority. In spite of all its misfortunes Hitler did
not sweep the country with his gospel of hatred and greed. He
needed the aid of monstrous lies, of very heavy subsidies from the
capitalists and of the cooperation of the, Church. I gave the
figures elsewhere.



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               8

            THE PIOUS TRAITORS OF BELGIUM AND FRANCE

     The correct attitude to face the problem of Germany is,
therefore, to ask whether all or what proportion of its people were
mentally and morally poisoned by this system which in its monopoly
has no parallel since the destruction of the medieval Church and in
its force, owing to modern science, has not the feeblest analogy in
any other period of history. The answer to that question is at
present impossible. In the spring of 1933, we saw, less than half
the adults of Germany voted for Hitler. The regime of brutal
intimidation and elimination, and of national bribery (the world is
our oyster), of corruption of the young, and of the influence and
bold successes won by the indolence or cowardice of the democracies
began at once, and further millions must have been attracted. At
the outbreak of the war a leading Socialist refugee said that
three-fifths of the nation supported Hitler without reserve one-
fifth applauded his successes but disliked him and much of his
work, and one-fifth, the core of the old Socialist and Communist
bodies, were secretly and bitterly anti-Nazi. The extraordinary
Nazi successes since then have probably won over large numbers. In
the summer of 1941 we would hardly estimate that one-fifth of the
people were anti-Nazi, and Ambassador Dodd, though not quite
consistent in his Diary, generally agrees. But a distinction on
paper between Nazi and anti-Nazi does not correspond to
psychological reality. Already millions who were carried away by
the rapid successes in West and East must be wavering or returning
to sanity in view of the news from Russia. What is most painful is
the spectacle of certainly the overwhelming majority of the Germans
applauding such foul victories, but, besides that millions of them
have the moral lead of the Black International on whom they have
been taught to rely in such matter's, we have the consolation of
feeling that what miseducation could do in six years sound
education can undo. The idea that aggressiveness and covetousness
are "in the blood" is a superficial conclusion of literary men who
know no science and distort fragments of history.

     However, we have here to confine ourselves to the relation of
the Black International to the wave of barbarism that now rolled
over Western Europe and at one time seemed to have a chance of
completely engulfing it. Here we distinguish between the German
hierarchy and the Vatican: not because, as Catholics pretend, the
Vatican has or may have no responsibility for the former, but
because the case against the black army in Germany itself is easily
settled whereas it is too early to expect clear evidence on the
latter. Indeed, since the invasion of Poland automatically made the
Catholics of the British Empire enemies of Germany and in a very
large measure involved the sympathies of the 15,000,000 Catholics
of America the Vatican had now to proceed with the utmost caution.
Of the attitude of the German Black International I have given
abundant evidence elsewhere, but nobody disputes it. It was united
and enthusiastic in supporting the war. From September, 1939, to
the present hour no paper has quoted any German bishop saying or in
the broadcast language hinting that these campaigns beyond the
frontiers of the Reich were brutal conquests dictated by that
hatred and greed which the Pope is now absurdly said to have
discerned from the start. I quoted the heads of the Church cheering
on the troops only a little more soberly than the Nazi press. I
showed that when the final victory seemed to be in sight the
prelates, assembled in full strength (as they rarely were), 
resolved to render solemn thanks to Hitler and his armies when the
work was complete.
                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               9

            THE PIOUS TRAITORS OF BELGIUM AND FRANCE

     You may ask, as some Catholics ask about the Pope himself.
What else could they do? If one replies that they might have done
what some writer's of Germany (Thomas Mann, etc.) and many writers
and other professional men of other countries did-express their
disgust at the foulness and cruelty, sacrifice all they had, and
fly from the debased country -- the retort will be that churchmen
have sacred duties to their people which forbid such conduct,
ardently as they desire to emulate it. One might justly ask whether
the duty to remain with their people required that they should open
their mouths in praise of the savagery and not at least have
maintained a dignified silence. And if it is said that this would
have brought some persecution upon their people we can point to an
enormous Catholic literature in which it is said to be proof of
the, holiness of the Church that priests and people everywhere
suffered every type of penalty rather than bow to iniquity or
injustice . . . But enough of this sophistry. The Nazi government
never persecuted priests for virtue, but for vice; and, while some
did go to prison for complaining of the government's invasion of
the rights of the Church not one ever braved punishment by saying
that the war was a campaign of greed. Nor does any sane man believe
that if the bishops had given an honorable lead and won a
consistent following the government would have shifted one-sixth of
the nation, including one-sixth of the army, into concentration
camps and aroused the anger of Catholics in Spain, Hungary, Italy,
and South America. The common-sense reply is: The bishops knew that
their people would not follow them. The Black International has no
inflexible moral principles. It follows the crowd when it applauds
a vile war as surely as when it rejoices over a royal birthday. The
myth of its moral leadership, its value to civilization, is torn to
shreds by the experience of the last ten years.

     It is well to remember, when Catholics airily reply that this
is not a criticism of the Church but of local bodies of clergy,
that the supposed beneficent influence of the Church on the world
must be exercised mainly, if not entirely, by these local clergy.
What, apart from his direction and control of their conduct, does
the Pope do? He makes "allocqtions" and broadcasts addresses and
issues letters, and the world takes no notice of them beyond paying
them verbal compliments. How much influence in the world have all
Pius XII's sermons on peace had? If any, it was bad: it fostered
trust in Hitler and Mussolini. As to the Encyclicals, the more
pretentious gestures of the Popes, even those on which American
apologists have written whole libraries, like the Immortals Dei and
the Rerum Novarum of Leo XIII -- we shall see presently why
American Catholics have said so little about the Quadragesimo Anno
of Pius XI, which the Vatican considers at least equally important
-- had no influence whatever. The press was most generous in praise
when they were issued, but there was not a journalistic expert on
sound political or economic matters in the world who did not know
that what was sound in them was borrowed by the Pope from the world
and was already a platitude in social literature.

     The test of the moral usefulness of Popes is to see what they
say or do when one of the local or national hierarchies under their
control is corrupted by applauding iniquity or when a crime of
world-proportions is committed which should be envisaged from an
international angle. To discuss the first point would be waste of 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               10

            THE PIOUS TRAITORS OF BELGIUM AND FRANCE

time. The Pope lets his bishops in Italy, Germany, and Japan wave
the blood-stained national flag as vigorously as schoolboys. And it
is hardly necessary to say anything more on the second point until
we come to the year 1940. The rape of Abyssinia, China, and Czecho-
Slovakia and the barbaric treatment of the Jews were the
outstanding crimes of that year. The Pope blessed the criminals.
The new Pope was at once confronted with the crime of the invasion
of Albania. He did the same. Those useful unauthorized agencies of
the Vatican have put about the rumor that he urged the King of
Italy to prevent it. Did the Pope not know, what all the world
knows, that the King of Italy had as little power to prevent it as
Lord Halifax has to emancipate India? In any case there is no
evidence of such action.

     Then came the invasion of the West. I have shown two things in
connection with this. The first is that it is impossible to doubt
that the plan was previously communicated to the Pope. Ribbentrop
has an hour's conversation with him on the eve of the Brenner
Conference at which the plot is finally settled and the date for
Mussolini to stab France in the back is fixed. Can one imagine any
other reason for thus sending the Nazi Foreign Secretary -- for the
first time, remember -- to the Vatican? The second point I have now
made clear is that the Pope certainly knew the character of the men
who directed the campaign and the soldiers who carried it out.

     I will suggest later what Germany wanted of the Pope --
Ribbentrop was certainly not sent to secure the loyalty of the
German hierarchy, which could be relied upon whatever crime was
committed -- and what the Pope, though terribly anxious and
nervous, hoped to get out of the invasion of the West. Here let us
see what he did. The worst crime from the international ethical
angle was the invasion of Norway, Denmark, Holland, and Belgium.
France had, with Great Britain, declared war on Germany, and must
expect attack. while these smaller powers had been lulled into a
feeling of security by the most solemnly reiterated lies, and the
invasion of them had to be excused by further monstrous lies. This
treachery and the corruption by which the Germans weakened in
advance the resistance to their superb Aryan warriors the Pope
never censured.

     Since there was no hierarchy in Norway or Denmark the
annexation of those countries does not concern us here. The reader
will find it interesting, in fact, to compare the proportion of
Catholics in the four countries first invaded with the Pope's
attitude. Norway had only 2827 Catholics in a population of nearly
3,000,000. Hitler demanded on April 9 that the country be handed
over to him, and, when this was refused, let loose the concealed
troops and traitors that he already had in the country to paralyze
opposition to the divisions he had on the way. The country
distinguished itself by its heroic resistance to impossible odds
when the blunder of its reliance on Nazi honor was realized and
sustaining the struggle for two months and proudly resisting the
invaders ever since. Compare the conduct of this least Catholic
country in Europe to that of Belgium and France. The invasion of it
was the most flagrant and significant aggression of which the Nazis
had yet been guilty, for the excuses put forward were not even
plausible. Ever since the beginning of the war, in fact, Norway had


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               11

            THE PIOUS TRAITORS OF BELGIUM AND FRANCE

protected German shipping in its coastal waters. But when the Pope
was asked to denounce the outrage, one of his unauthorized
mouthpieces explained that Norway had only 2,000 Catholics and he
must think of the Catholics of Germany and not offend Hitler. I
give the quotation presently. The only respect in which one could
truly call the Pope the Great Neutral was in regard to the moral
law.

     Denmark had only 22,137 Catholics in a population of
3,700,000. One might almost call it the second least Catholic
country in Europe. It was a very happy, enlightened, and
progressive little state, a significant contrast to Poland, Eire,
or even Belgium (which, however, was only half Catholic). Of the
deputies in its Folksting (Congress) 64 were Socialists, 31
Liberals, 26 Conservatives, 14 Radicals, 3 Communists, and 11 the
usual odds and ends Roman Catholic doctrine had no appeal whatever
in that very free and stimulating atmosphere, so -- naturally --
the Pope did not shed a tear over the repulsive treachery of the
Nazis. As late as May, 1939, the Germans had signed a ten-years
pact with the Danes, swearing that under no circumstances whatever
would they use force against Denmark or injure it. As will be
remembered, they gave the Danes no chance whatever to defend
themselves, just taking the land over in a rush as it had a common
frontier with Germany. Doubtless the Pope would, if anybody had
taken the trouble to appeal to him, have explained that it was "not
a Catholic country." We used to think that Popes were interested in
ethics in all parts of the world.

     Holland, which during the Middle Ages had been under Catholic
Spain, was in a different position. It had nearly 3,000,000
Catholics to 5,000,000 Protestants and Freethinkers. Its rich
colonial empire added to its importance, and although it was less
progressive than Denmark and Scandinavia, it had 23 Socialist
deputies amongst the hundred in its Congress. Catholics had 30. You
will, therefore, not be surprised to learn that, when the Germans
broke their pact with Holland and spread over the country with
great brutality and treachery the Pope awoke. Defying Hitler and
his watch dogs in Rome he sent a telegram of sympathy to the queen
of Holland. But I doubt if Hitler minded. He knew that the Pope
must be allowed to make these innocent little gestures sometimes to
blunt the edge of Catholic criticism in America and Britain and
give the Catholic press something to be enthusiastic about. The
wording of the telegram was, in fact, very cautious. Its one
approach to censure was that Holland had been invaded "against its
wish and right." It rather reminds us of the timid sort of neighbor
who venture's to say to a man who has savagely beaten a wife or
child: "You shouldn't do that, you know." Dutch Catholics seem to
have been quite satisfied, even proud of the splendid audacity of
their Pope.

     Since it is as yet impossible to get evidence of the behavior
of Dutch Catholics to the invaders, such as we get in the case of
the traitors of Belgium and France, I leave the question open. They
may, of course, have behaved quite differently from their
coreligionists in France and Belgium. All that we know is that in
face of this monstrous violation of the rights of small nations,
about which the Pope is so concerned in his Five Points of Peace, 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               12

            THE PIOUS TRAITORS OF BELGIUM AND FRANCE

and of the honor of international agreements the Pope merely
uttered a very mild word of protest when it involved a country with
a large and rich body of Catholics. Whether the Black International
had had anything to do with the pathetic blunders of the Dutch and
Belgians in refusing until it was too late to concert measures of
defense with the British and French we cannot say, and I decline to
speculate.

     The fact that Poland had included a good deal of genuine
German territory had given a shadow of an excuse for invading that
country, yet the Pope, taking advantage of the fact Russia invaded
it at the same time, had vaguely censured the behavior of the
Germans (or both armies) in that country. The invasion of Norway,
Denmark, and Holland had not an atom of excuse. It was the first
defiant unveiling of the Nazi greed for the conquest and
exploitation of Europe. American Catholics were greatly disturbed
and pressed for a Papal condemnation. On April 12 the Vatican
correspondent of the Herald-Tribune referred to this pressure and
said that the Pope "declined to act" on the ground that "the Holy
See cannot participate in a political movement which would only
lead to further hatred amongst the belligerents."

     That piece of moral cowardice and sophistry did not satisfy
people who had been reading all their lives that the Pope was the
moral governor of the earth and an inflexible judge. On April 17
the Vatican correspondent of the New York Times reported that the
Vatican would be little concerned if the war spread to the Balkans
because "no Roman Catholic country would be involved." He added
that it was rumored in high Vatican quarters that through Myron B.
Taylor the President had pressed the Pope to condemn the invasion
of Norway and Denmark, and he was instructed by one of those
conveniently anonymous mouthpieces of the Vatican to add:

     "While the Holy See strongly condemns Germany's action and has
sponsored the attacks against the Reich in the Osservatore Romano,
it is pointed out that there are only 2,619 Roman Catholics in
Norway out of a population of nearly 3,000,000. Therefore, although
the moral aspect is severely judged, from the practical viewpoint
it is stated that the Holy See must keep in mind the 30,000,000
German Roman Catholics in its activities."

     This muddled declaration -- "strongly condemning" Germany in
one breath and explaining in the next why the Vatican must not
condemn it -- and the letter of sympathy to the queen of Holland
are all that the apologist for the Pope can quote. The above
passage could, of course, if Germany had protested, have been
explained away at once as unauthorized, and the telegram (after
weeks of pressure) cannot be called a condemnation. If one phrase
in it is so represented we must say that that kind of kid-gloved
ruling of a world in which greed and brutality had become an
appalling force is of no use whatever to the race. What sticks in
the mind is the repeated statement that the Pope is deeply
concerned only when a crime is committed against a Catholic country
-- it injures the Church -- and that his moral censures must be
trimmed in accordance with the interests of the Church. But even
this position, whether or no you regard it as morally respectable
and humanly serviceable, collapses when we come to study 
developments in Belgium and France. There we find the Black
International really at work.
                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               13

            THE PIOUS TRAITORS OF BELGIUM AND FRANCE

                           Chapter III


                    THE TREACHERY OF LEOPOLD


     We come now to those parts of Germany's western offensive on
which the mist still lies, and charges of cowardice and treachery
and fiery denials shuttle back and forth amongst the Belgians and
French themselves as vigorously as military men dispute the moves
in the campaign. Here, on the face of it, we find it difficult to
trace the action of the Black International, and recent writers
give us little assistance. There is so general an agreement that
there was base treachery to the cause of civilization that,
journalists, essayists, and authors are more careful than ever not
to "offend Catholics." Most of them, however, make one honest
blunder which distorts the perspective. They take the conventional
view that both Belgium and France are "Catholic countries". The
effect of this is to give the reader the impression that the
division of the country into supporter's of the traitors and
opponents of their policy was just a split in a Catholic body and
therefore the question of Church influence need not even be raised.
This is entirely wrong, and when we correct it we see at once that
the arch-traitors and their leading supporters, if not the main
body of their supporters (which is obscure), are docile Catholics
and their most bitter opponents. non-Catholics.

     Belgium require's a few words of historical explanation. Its
Catholicism, like that of Holland, is largely due to its inclusion
in the Spanish Empire in the later Middle Ages, and its energy was
absorbed in a fight for freedom, in which patriotic priests joined
(as in Ireland) with people, at the time when other northern
countries were discussing religion and breaking away from Rome.
Austria and France in turn ruled it to the French Revolution, when
it declared itself an independent Republic. But at the fall of
Napoleon the Council of Vienna put it under Protestant Holland, and
the fierce struggle against that country to 1839, when it won its
independence, hardened its creed. To this date the Belgians had had
a splendid record of spirited self-assertion, but with the
expulsion of the Dutch the Black International fastened upon the
country, with the usual consequences.

     Further, Belgium contains two different peoples, and they are
almost as antagonistic as the English and Irish. Though one's
impression in travelling amongst them is that the Walloons in the
south (including Brussels and the great manufacturing towns) are a
volatile Latin people and the Flemings, in the northern half are
closer to the Dutch, all are really of Teutonic stock, but the
southerners, whose daily speech is French, are naturally more
French in culture while the mainly agricultural Flemings are heavy,
backward, and priest-ridden. I lived amongst them for a year and am
not here repeating the impressions of literary travellers, but
these few preliminary lines will suffice for my present purpose.

     By the opening of the present century Belgium, of which it
was, and still is, said in our works of reference that "the great
majority of the population are Catholics", was permeated with 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               14

            THE PIOUS TRAITORS OF BELGIUM AND FRANCE

skepticism of the French type. French literature had a free run in
the French-speaking half of the country, and from the middle class,
which was for the far greater part anti-Papal, this revolt was
spreading rapidly to the urban workers. I found it extensive even
in some rural districts. In my special research (The Decay of the
Church of Rome) in 1909 I found that the Church had about 4,500,000
members and had lost about 2,500,000. The Black international
dreaded the new urban industrial conditions, as the Catholic
leaders now do in France and the Vatican does everywhere. They mean
the growth of free and informed discussion. And when, after the
war, Socialism and Communism spread amongst the workers as
Liberalism had spread in the professional classes, the Church began
a struggle for life.

     The absurdity of the conventional statement that Belgians are
"for the most part" Catholics is positively proved by the electoral
statistics, which here, as in the case of pre-Fascist Italy, pre-
nazi Germany, and pre-Franco Spain afford decisive evidence as to
religion; and the fact that this was true in the democratic era and
ceased with it will give you another indication whether it is true
that Pius XII is "a great admirer of democracy", as American
Catholic writers say. At the last election (1939) the country
returned 73 Catholic deputes, to whom we may add 17 Flemish
Nationalists and 4 Rexists. Against these there were 61 Socialist
deputies, 33 Liberay (very anti-clerical), 9 Radicals, and 9
Communists. In other words explicitly anti-clerical candidates were
returned by much more than half of the adult community. Even the
Senate had only 61 Catholics out of 150.

     At the previous election (1936) the number of Catholic
deputies had been reduced from 79 to 63, and a candid Catholic
French writer in the (Catholic) Revue des Deux Mondes (June 15,
1936) gives an interesting explanation of this. There had been a
grave financial scandal in which the Church had been "very guilty."
In order to "increase its strength and enrich some of its members"
it had "embarked upon sordid speculations." It is an old and
familiar clerical story. It was chiefly the Rexist Party that had
reaped the advantage at the polls of the exposure of this Scandal.
The Rexists are the followers of a young Belgian Catholic Leon
Degrelle, who marked out a path for his political ambition by
raising the banner of what we may call Christian Socialism, or that
milk-and-water blend of Socialist rhetoric about capitalists (while
defending capital) and Catholic abuse of Socialists which the late
Pope recommended in an encyclical that we will analyze in the last
chapter. By 1939, as the above figures show, Degrelle had lost a
good deal of the ground he had won, but he and his movement must be
taken into serious account. His ideal was Mussolini's Corporative
State, as modified in the Pope's Encyclical, so he was patronized
both by Mussolini and the Vatican. He used an Italian broadcasting
station to weaken the Belgian government by his abuse and to appeal
for "a joint effort of Italy and Belgium to bar the way of
Bolshevism." The usefulness of the movement to Germany is obvious,
and today Degrelle is very active under the Germans and in
cooperation with them.





                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               15

            THE PIOUS TRAITORS OF BELGIUM AND FRANCE

     The above figures reflect a distracted and disunited country
which the unified might of Germany would easily devour unless it 
kept up its old alliance with France and Britain, which had saved
it in 1918. This Leopold the Traitor prevented. On his own
initiative he had in 1936 renounced all Belgium's military
alliance's and pledged the fate of his country on the veracity and
honor of Adolph Hitler! Belgium still had a large army, but, though
the men are brave enough, its poor quality had been seen in the
last war. It is the fairly equal division of parties and the
influence of the Church that permitted a neurotic monarch of poor
intelligence to assume such power. The country had alternated for
years between Liberal and Catholic rule, and with the rise to power
of the Socialists it had Seen some unhealthy coalitions. Many
Liberals, as usual, supported even the Church they hated against
the threat of Socialism, but the Socialists themselves entered an
almost unique feature of political life -- into a coalition with
the Catholics against the capitalists. I remember discussing the
matter in 1924 during a merry dinner on the Boulevard Michel in
Paris with the Socialist leader Denis and a group of French
Freethinkers. Denis laughingly said that they would make a deal
with the devil if they could get anything out of it, I reminded him
of the proverb: He who sups with the devil needs a long spoon.
Today Socialism is extinct in Belgium and the Church and the
Rexists rule in the ruins under their German master.

     This is the true perspective in which one has to see the
question of the Belgian treachery. It would be well also for
Americans to investigate closely, if they can, the movement of
their Catholic ambassador at Brussels, Cudahy. It was stated in the
British press he visited Berlin and the Vatican, then had a few
days with Kennedy in London, before returning to America to make a
defense of Leopold. There is little doubt that Roosevelt and
Churchill intend to make it one of the terms of the final
settlement that Leopold shall be returned to his throne. No one has
charged them with an intention to see that the rights of the
Socialists and Communists also are restored.

     What are the known facts about the great betrayal? After
refusing until the last moment to allow his military chiefs to
concert a plan of defense with the French and British experts,
Leopold, when the invasion began, appealed to them for help. We
know now that neither French nor British armies were properly
equipped to meet the mechanized German divisions, though the
preparation of these had taken years, but, while there is a great
deal of controversy about the campaign, it is the conviction of
some leading experts that even when the Germans had thrust through
to the sea the position of the Belgian, French, and British armies
in Belgium was not hopeless. There is fair agreement that lack of
ability and energy in the higher command of each was as detrimental
as the lack of heavy equipment. The most significant pact is that
it was the conviction of the Belgian cabinet that the situation was
not hopeless.

     We next have the admitted fact that on May 27, Leopold,
without consulting his ministers, entered into negotiations with
the Germans for a surrender. They at once closed on him, and at 4
a.m. on the 28th, while the troops slept and the Allies had no 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               16

            THE PIOUS TRAITORS OF BELGIUM AND FRANCE

suspicion what Leopold was doing, he signed the betrayal of his
army. It is further a well-known fact that the Belgian ministers,
who were in France, issued a statement on the 30th to the effect
that the King's act was illegal and unconstitutional -- in fact the
Belgian Constitution did not recognize any royal document as valid
unless it had also the signature of a minister -- and they deposed
him.

     The evil consequences of this act cannot be exaggerated. To
the King's plea that further sacrifices, by his people were useless
a Frenchman might retort in a famous line of the great tragedian
Racine who, when one character, excusing a fault, asks, "What else
could they do?", replies "They could die." It is, however, not
necessary here to discuss that. Leopold's treachery to his Allies
and to Civilization was greater than his betrayal of Belgium. It
left a large British army suddenly isolated and fatally weakened,
and the men had to abandon all the equipment which it had taken 18
months to prepare and run in disorder for Dunkirk, where the lives
of most of them were saved by a memorable piece of heroism. Leopold
nearly had to answer for 100,000 or more British lives, for it was
mainly the destruction of the British army that he had -- one is
inclined to say sold -- to the Germans; and he knew it. The further
consequences were even worse but will be considered later. The
treachery confirmed the defeatists in high French military quarters
and led to an even more disgraceful apostasy from the ideals of
civilization.

     Leopold and his Catholic Supporters in Belgium today, protest
that he did send word of his intention to his Allies. He had sworn
not to make a separate peace and is uneasy on this point. It is
undisputed that no such message reached either the French or the
British. Reynaud, broadcasting on the same day and branding
Leopold's act as one "without precedent in history", made this
clear. But it is not disputed. The question we ask ourselves is not
whether Leonold sent a message which the Germans intercepted but
whether he was stupid enough to fancy that they would not be on the
watch for any communication. The man is, like most European kings,
of such poor intelligence that one would not be surprised to learn
that he handed a message to the Germans who kindly promised to
deliver it. But the whole story is so improbable that we may prefer
to think that Leopold's clerical advisers recommended him to lie
for the good of the Church. This would be nearer the millionth than
the first time in history.

     But how shall we estimate whether he is likely -- there is, of
course, no evidence -- to have acted under clerical influence? A
Catholic king has two separate groups of counsellors: his ministers
and bishops. We know that he did not consult the former, who were
hundreds of miles away. The latter were in Belgium, and this was
just the kind of issue on which they were apt to be consulted. His
dilemma was whether conscience overruled his oath to observe the
Constitution. It is the business of priests to solve such problems
in a Catholic Court. One of the first to defend the king was the
bead of the Belgian Church, Cardinal von Roey. In a pastoral that
he ordered to be read in every church he endorsed Leopold's act
(London Times, June 18, 1940). The telegram which the Pope sent him



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               17

            THE PIOUS TRAITORS OF BELGIUM AND FRANCE

was before the betrayal and merely sympathized with him on the
invasion of his county, "against its right and wish" and trusted it
would one day recover its Independence: the least the Pope could do
in face of an outraged world.

     That the Osservatore, which could be repudiated as
unauthorized, went further and charged the Germans with having
opened "a pitiless war of extermination conducted in defiance of
the laws of war" does not impress us. The Vatican was at that date,
as I will explain more fully later, trying to drive a bargain with
the Nazis and almost became bold, or at least less cowardly. It
published British and French war-news in the Osservatore (to the
great financial profit of that paper, as no other Italian paper was
allowed to do so), and the Fascist press howled that the Pope was
"the ally of the Jews, the Freemasons, the democracies, and the
English Protestants." But it very quickly lost this honorable
position (New York Times, May 18 and 21). Mussolini cracked his
whip, and the Vatican obeyed. A week later the Rome correspondent
of the most respected British daily, the Manchester Guardian (May
24), reported: "The National Socialist State has, it seems, been
able to read an understanding with the Catholic leaders." There had
been another plum-promises in regard to the Church in Poland,
Bohemia, etc. -- for the good boy. At that date, as all the world
knows, the juggernauts of Germany were plowing red furrows in the
masses of Belgian and French fugitives. The flower of Hitler's
training colleges in chivalry were treating old women and war-
prisoners with the brutality which I have described. The traitors
and quislings were getting out their swastika flags. And the Pope,
as I have already quoted, sent his "personal affection" to the
German soldiers.

     The larger question, what benefit the Pope might expect to
derive from a German victory in the west, must be postponed until
the final chapter, after we have considered what happened in
France. Belgium today is Catholic, beggared, and dishonored. It
lives by making tanks and bombs for use Against England and Russia
and food for Germans who keep their fat while Europe starves.
Degrelle has reached his miserable ambition. Having looked to
Mussolini instead of Hitler he at first thought it prudent to fly.
The Germans came to an understanding with him, and he manages to
accommodate the social-political teaching of the Pope's encyclical
to the merciless exploitation of the country by the Germans. His
paper Le Pays Riel urges Belgians to "forget past quarrels" and
piously endure their new slavery. His party is the only one
permitted in French-speaking Belgium. Over the rest of it the Black
International and the Gestapo wield a benevolent control and there
is less sabotage than in any other conquered country.




                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               18

            THE PIOUS TRAITORS OF BELGIUM AND FRANCE

                           Chapter IV

          FRANCE RECOVERS ITS FAITH AND LOSES ITS HONOR

     There is no more pathetic chapter of recent history than the 
fall of proud France from its earlier position as one of the
leading powers of modern civilization. It had led the advancing
nations of the world from the days of Voltaire to 1918. The
movement of intellectual emancipation which began in Voltaire,
Rousseau, and Montesquieu and broadened into the period of the
Encyclopaedists culminated in the Great Revolution that lit the
world. French idealism had already enkindled the revolutionary
flame in America. Now its light awakened a fever for reform in
England, Italy, and Spain and transformed Latin America. In the
long and terrible reaction which followed the fall of Napoleon
France still led. Its revolutions of 1830, 1848, and 1870 are
milestones in man's laborious climb, back to the height of 1790. It
again led the world in the complete secularization of the state,
and, while priests mournfully predicted that this would lead to
degeneration, the nation fought with all its old vigor and heroism
when the test came in 1914, After 1919 every friend of France saw
a change. Scandals multiplied, the old vitality was squandered in
domestic quarrels, and when the test again came France, to the
stupefaction of the world, promptly raised the yellow flag and
bought peace with dishonor.

     Is it a mere coincidence that this period of degeneration,
1919 to 1939, is the only period in modern French history in which
you will find a Catholic claim of a great religious revival? In
1909 I proved that there were not more than 6,000,000 genuine
Catholics in a total population of 39,000,000. The only serious
criticism. came from the distinguished French Protestant Scholar,
Sabatier, a high and very impartial authority on religion, who
wrote me that there were in France at that date no more than
4,000,000 genuine, or as the French say practicing, Catholics. The
war of 1914-1919 brought Alsace-Lorraine, with more than 1,000,000
Catholics back to France. This very natural development had the
unforeseen consequence of compelling the French government, which
had contemptuously ignored the Vatican and been heavily scolded by
it for 20 years, in increasing the power of the priests to a
remarkable extent. The Alsace-Lorrainers wanted independence, not
absorption in France, and the chronic unrest of the provinces,
fostered by the clergy, gave the Vatican one of its usual
opportunities: we will keep Alsace-Lorraine docile for you if you
will make concessions to the Church. As political security and
economic prosperity are far more sacred things than either religion
or irreligion the bargain was struck. Alsace and Lorraine had
brought great wealth to French capitalists and, on the other hand,
they were the weak spot in the heel of France if, or when, the
German war of revenge opened.

     From 1880 to that time no French politician had taken the
Church into account. Catholic statesmen are as unknown in that
period as Catholic scientists, philosopher's, economists, or
historians of leading rank. Still in the period between the two
wars every French statesman was a Freethinker, except the
Protestant Waldeck-Rousseau, but even the most skeptical of them 
now showed an ostentatious respect of the Church.

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               19

            THE PIOUS TRAITORS OF BELGIUM AND FRANCE

     I was at Athens in 1922 when the news came that the Turks in
Asia Minor had inflicted on the Greeks the worst defeat they have
suffered in modern history. I was in the British Legation when the
Greek Foreign Minister secretly brought the news -- it was
concealed from the public for four days -- and the secretary, a
friend of mine, told me that the minister assured them that it was
with French help that the Turks had made a sudden and overwhelming
attack. When I repeated that in England the journalistic "experts"
leered, and a few years later a Harvard professor whom I met
assured me that, though he had himself suspected it, it was not
believed in America. But as usual the truth came out and may be
read partly even in the Catholic Teeling. The Vatican did not want
the Greeks to get Constantinople, as they easily could have done --
I had been a few days earlier with a large Greek army within a
day's march of Constantinople which then had no Turkish troops --
because that would enormously increase the power of the Greek
Church in the East.

     This is one of a hundred instances of "the government of Jews
and Freemasons," as Rome had called the French government for forty
years, cooperating most respectfully with the Vatican. In 1925 I
attended the Freethought Congress at Paris. The government frowned
on it and it was a total failure. But the canonization of Joan of
Arc brought out the freethinking politicians and officials in
crowds to attend the gorgeous ceremonies. After the blunders of the
fire-eating Catholic-cooperating statesmen of 1919-1924 the
Radical's under Herriot got power and tried to recall the
ambassador from the Vatican. The Church got the deputies from
Alsace-Lorraine to rebel, and the wealthy Catholics, and even the
peasants with fat stockings, held back their money from public
funds and defeated a government which really represented the
majority of the nation. So the truckling to the Vatican continued.
The Czechs, as I have earlier explained, defied the Vatican and
expelled its Nuncio. Rome turned to France, the alliance with which
was vital to Czecho-Slovakia, and the Czechs had to yield. In
return the Pope, to the scandal of good Catholics, heavily censured
the Catholic-royalist body in France, on the ground that it
detected heresy in the leaders, and seemed to relieve the French
government of one of its embarrassments.

     I have in these booklets so severely to condense all matters
referring to the period before 1936 that I must run the risk of
giving the reader an inadequate impression. He should understand
that the world-tragedy of today is far more surely the culmination
of the miserable history of Europe from 1919 to 1936 than it is a
consequences of the Conference of Versailles to which so many
attribute it, and in no case is this clearer than in that of
France. Free French writers have called the appalling conduct of
the Vichy group "the Revenge of the Dreyfusards." The affaire
Dreyfus is generally forgotten -- the attempt of Catholic military
men and politicians in the last century to make a scapegoat of an
innocent Jew, foiled by Zola and the anti-Catholic politicians --
but it is profoundly true that what is happening in unoccupied
France today is the revenge of Catholic generals and politicians,
in the name of the Church and with the aid of the German bandits,
on the men and the entire modern regime of life which have kept
them in obscurity and impotence for more than half a century.


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               20

            THE PIOUS TRAITORS OF BELGIUM AND FRANCE

     The preparation for that revenge covers the entire period from
1919, beginning with the prestige which the Catholic generals Foch
Petain, and Weygand had won in the last war and the annexation of
Alsace-Lorraine. Lorraine brought to French capitalists and
bankers, one of the greatest iron-ore beds in the world and to
French bishops a very substantial reinforcement. So these brother's
in arms based the whole policy of France on the cry of the security
of the country, the "sacred union" of all Frenchmen (or cessation
of attacks on the Church), and close alliance with the Vatican.
Since the French press was in those years no more disposed or free
than the American and British to tell the truth about Rome, the
French people never realized that from 1933 onward the Papacy was
in close alliance with their deadly enemy across the Rhine, the man
who had sworn in print to trample France in the mud and to reduce
Britain to the status of a little island out on the Atlantic. The
same planting of Catholics in high military quarters and in the
diplomatic and civil service is taking place in the British Empire
-- see the Catholic Who's Who as in France. It might be useful if
some American writer were to make a corresponding inquiry on this
side.

     But, as I said, although the most important material for
judging the question of the Black International and the great
French betrayal is found in the prewar developments, they must here
be dismissed briefly. Let us say that the country was terribly
enfeebled and its attention diverted by the passionate quarrels of
half a dozen rival parties, or of men ambitious to lead parties of
their own. The scandals in public life which occasionally occurred
reveal no worse corruption than in America but they are more
fiercely discussed. It was the dissipation of forces that chiefly
counted. Even the sound progressive body of the people was split,
in virtue of the old jibes about Socialism and liberty and the
personal ambition's of politicians, into Radicals, Radical-
Socialists, and Socialists. Read the appalling description of
France in 1938 -- "like one in deadly sickness it neither moves nor
speaks on the threshold of an agony", etc. -- in J.C. Maxence's
Histoire de dexans 1927-1937 (1938).

     Two parties chiefly profited by the confusion, the Communists
and the Catholic Royalists. The Communists made their usual mistake
of encouraging pacifism because "the capitalist system was not
worth fighting for" and of saying that the Church no longer needed
watching. One wonders what they say in their ruin and misery today.

     Catholic-Royalism, which is the French form of Fascism, grew
and became bolder every year. Teeling is quite wrong when he claims
that the developments in France show that the Church had regained
considerable ground, but his acceptance of a world-total of
330,000,000 (instead of about 250,000,000) Catholics shows that he
has made no study of this matter. I have elsewhere shown that the
estimates of French Catholic writers varied from five to ten
millions, and that the best of them and the Catholic Denis Gwynne
(resident in France) regard the latter figure as very excessive. If
we split the difference and say 7,500,000 (in a total population of
42,000,000) we see that, taking into account the inclusion of the
Catholics of Alsace-Lorraine, there has been no growth of the 



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               21

            THE PIOUS TRAITORS OF BELGIUM AND FRANCE

Church since 1919. It is in power alone, in virtue of its intrigues
and its high military members, that the position of the Church
improved; and it is just in this respect that we look for its
influence in the betrayal of the country.

     A small library has already been written on the military
collapse of France. When we allow for the folly of the French, who
would never submit to sufficient taxation to provide an army
equipped like that of Germany, in trusting to the Maginot Line and
leaving their northern frontier practically open and their very
inferior equipment we still have, as most experts admit, a very
serious situation to explain, The successive blunders -- Reynaud
called some of them "unbelievable faults" in the Chamber -- cannot
be discussed here. Shirer sums up all criticisms in the phrase:
"France did not fight." He means, of course, not with its old fire,
perseverance, and ability. When he explains that this was due to
Communist pacifism in the ranks and defeatism amongst the higher
officers we do not quite follow him. The Communists were a
relatively small minority, and any Communist soldier who wavered
would get short shrift.

     On the fact that there was something wrong in the higher
command and that, specifically, Wegand and Petain showed deplorable
weakness and defeatism the majority of impartial experts are
agreed. As these soldiers, on whose verdict that a continuation of
the war was hopeless the French government had to rely, and the
bunch of admirals, generals, and politicians who at once emerged to
support them are Catholics, as the immediate result of their
assuming power by betraying the country was an intensification of
the power of the Church, and as Blum, Reynaud, Daladier, and nearly
all the non-Catholic statesmen were opposed to surrender, we very
decidedly have a case for suspecting Church influence. Only the
Vatican and Catholic countries like Brazil, Portugal, Spain, and
Eire fully endorsed the surrender and support the Vichy group of
traitors today. It is, in fact, only because the British and
American Press dare not, for fear of their Catholic censors, even
raise the question of Church influence or inquire into the
significance of the rise to power of a Catholic group for the first
time in 65 years that many are surprised at the suggestion.

     Let us examine what happened. At the critical phase, when
Weygand, whose feeble appeals to the troops sufficiently show that
he was something of a defeatist from the start, completely failed
in his strategy and the Germans were rushing toward Paris, Reynaud
for some obscure reason took two well-known Catholic defeatists,
Baudoxiin and Prouvost, into the cabinet. What we shall see
presently will suggest that this was due to the intrigues of Laval
and other Catholics. A few days later (June 10) Italy delivered
what Roosevelt called "the stab in the back," and French morale
fell still lower. On the 12th Weygand reported that resistance was
hopeless. Reynaud appealed frantically to America for help and
Churchill, agreeing with him that the reply was unsatisfactory,
consented to relieve France of its agreement not to seek a separate
peace. Reynaud and the majority of the cabinet wanted to continue
the war, but "the will to fight had departed from Marshal Petain
and General Weygand, and their example was contagious." On the 16th
Reynaud resigned, and the President asked Petain, "who responded 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               22

            THE PIOUS TRAITORS OF BELGIUM AND FRANCE

with alacrity," to form a government nearly the Vichy group of 
today. At once the senile Marshal (aged 84) asked an armistice
fatuously explaining to the Germans that the settlement would be
"as between soldiers" who respected each other. Daladier, Delbos,
Mandel, and other of the old ministers took ship from Bordeaux to
Africa, intending to carry on the war from there, as the elementary
dictates of French honor, when not diluted with piety, required.
They were arrested and returned to France as prisoners. Petain
signed what he incredibly called "hard but honorable" terms, and he
and his gang moved to Vichy and began to spit epithets at the one
power, Great Britain, that seemed to be left to face alone the
appalling might of Germany reinforced by all the resources, except
the fleet, of France and six other conquered lands.

     That is the summary, condensed, of events which we find in the
most important and most impartial annual survey of contemporary
history, the Annual Register. But I have reserved for special
notice one part of the narrative. The thoughtful reader will, of
course want to know how Petain, a man (as subsequent development's
show) no more fitted for statesmanship than for teaching zoology,
came to be chosen for the supreme position and his bunch of
Catholic friends were waiting for his call. If I suggested that
this crucial development was due to the intrigues of Catholics I
should be accused of prejudiced imagination, but that is just what
the Annual Register states.

     Laval a docile Catholic in good order at the Vatican and a
thorough defeatist, was, it says, "the most responsible for French
politics at this juncture," When the government transferred to
Bordeaux he went there and, the Annual says, intrigued with all his
energy to get "peace at any price". Reynaud, not a man of
sufficient personality to meet so terrible a crisis and assailed by
rumors of an entanglement of an unpleasant character, was worn
down. Petain, on the other hind, was flattered to his teeth and
persuaded "by Laval (who hoped to rule France through him) that he
was called by God to save France. President Lebrun and Herriot were
dissuaded from shifting the government to North Africa and
conducting the war from there, and Mandel, Daladier, and others had
to fly secretly to carry out the plan. Laval was taken into
Petain's group and became, when the members of the Senate and
Chamber (Congress's) voted themselves out of existence by 569 votes
to 80 and made Petain dictator, Vice-Premier.

     In giving a summary above of indications of an increasing
Church influence in France I postponed one item. On June 9, 1935,
the Papal organ, the Osservatore Romano (quoted in Keesing)
recalled with joy that for the first time in 70 years a French
cabinet-minster was visiting the Pope and kissing his ring. He wore
the insignia of the Order of Pius IX, which had been bestowed upon
him by Pill's XI. He presented several sumptuously bound works of
Catholic piety to the Pope, who gave his daughter a gold and coral
rosary such as a Catholic maid would treasure for life. The Times
(June 10) and other papers referred to the facts as another
admirable symptom (like Mussolini's bargain with the Vatican) of
the wise reconciliation of the secular and spiritual powers.




                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               23

            THE PIOUS TRAITORS OF BELGIUM AND FRANCE

     The devout pilgrim was Pierre Laval, who thus entered upon a
friendship with the Secretary of State, Cardinal Pacelli. Laval is
now so universally loathed that our papers will not even mention
that he is a Catholic, much less recall his Papal decorations and
his close Vatican connection. Pacelli, a year or two later,
returned the visit. He was the first Papal Legate to be received in
Paris since 1814, and he was very royally received. And at the
following New Year's Day there was a fresh Papal decoration for
Laval, and one even for the freethinking Prime Minister.

     If any readers still hesitate about the share of the Black
International in the betrayal of France let us consider what
happened. The French hierarchy at once at the surrender ordered
their people to support Petain. The Pope, who mediated in the
settlement with Italy, sent Petain a personal message and a letter
pointing out to the French bishops that the new situation made
possible "a reawakening of the entire nation." The Osservatore
surpassed itself, hailing "the dawn of a new radiant day not only
for France but for Europe and the world" (Catholic Herald, July
12). As all the world which was not Catholic-Fascist or under the
lash of the Gestapo considered the new day one of dishonor for
France and of evil augury for the world Cardinal Hinsley, head of
the Church in Britain, was compelled to ask what the Great Neutral
meant by this. The article, it was explained, was not authorized.
Even under Hinsley's nose, in his Catholic Herald, the jubilation
at the Catholic victory broke out. A writer said that "all that is
vital in the soul of France, purified and glorified in heroic
suffering, can look out once more upon Europe with a clear
Christian purpose". Next week Hinsley had to explain to an outraged
England that that was not authorized. but the paper continued (see
editorial October 11, etc.) to rejoice, more discreetly, that the
action of France had promoted the plan of a Catholic bloc and had
inaugurated "a big and vital movement." Could anything but the
interest of the Church inspire such glorification of cowardice and
treachery in a British paper?

     Then the senile wreck, too dense or too pious to sense his
dishonor, began to set up the New Order in France. For the grand
(if exaggerated) cry of "Liberty, Equality, Fraternity" that had
once roused the world and was now blotted but as a blasphemy Petain
mumbled his new trilogy,"Work, Family, Country." Religion first.
The beetles, male or female, waddled back to the schools and
institutions from which they had been banished, with great profit,
for 50 years; the text-books were rewritten under Petain's personal
supervision -- surely a unique spectacle! -- and all non-Catholic
teachers (in a country with 45 million non-Catholics to 7 million
Catholics) were expelled or turned into hypocrites. This
development went so far that the Germans had to make Petain modify
it to prevent riots. Women were shut back in the Middle Ages, and
favor, even ordinary justice, shown only to parents with at least
three children. And the good workers were to be meekly organized on
the lines of the Papal encyclical which I will analyze in the next
chapter and the employers educated in that beautiful Catholic
spirit of paternal kindliness to their helpless employees which
had, of course, been seen everywhere until this modern atheism and
the urban industrial conditions which begot it arose in the
nineteenth century. French bankers and capitalists, who are now 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               24

            THE PIOUS TRAITORS OF BELGIUM AND FRANCE

falling over each other and fighting truculently to get fat jobs
under the Germans -- are, in fact, now making fortunes by making
armaments for use against Britain and Russia -- smiled at the old
fool and his priests but encouraged him. No more Socialism or
Communism in France.

     I do not care to enlarge further on the spectacle of a great
nation that has been betrayed into misery and shame by a few
priest-ridden leaders, but the consequences to the few nations that
remained civilized were appalling. Soon afterwards I watched from
my bedroom-window, five miles away, the most precious square mile
of the city of London, with its historic treasures as well as its
vast stores, dissolve in flames, and for weeks later I met the poor
maimed folk who had left their dead in the cinders of their homes.
It goes on. As I write Vichy is deliberating whether to put its
fleet (contrary to the most solemn pledges) and its vast African
empire at the disposal of Germany for the final destruction of
civilization in Europe. And Papa Pacelli continues to bless Vichy.
The one man in the miserable group whose sense of honor is not
smothered by his piety, is dismissed as if this were a disgrace .
. . France will yet -- next year, I venture to think -- rise again,
shake in the wind the defiant tricolor that spells out its old
trilogy, "Liberty, Equality, Fraternity," and prove to the dead
traitors and their priests that it has lost neither its honor nor
its vigor.



                            Chapter V


             THE AMAZING FOLLY OF THE CATHOLIC BLOC


     What gain did the Black International think it would derive
from the German conquest of Belgium and France? I have already
established two points. First, as is made plain in every chapter of
these booklets, no human consideration -- no thought of secular
ruin and the "earthly" suffering of millions -- is allowed to stand
in the way of the clerical ambition. We have seen it from Spain to
Abyssinia, from Brazil to Vienna. The pretext is that men's
"immortal" interests outweigh all these "temporal" disasters: the
fact is that the protection or recovery of the power and wealth of
the Black International comes first. Secondly, there is no room for
doubt that the Vatican was warned in advance of the conquest of
Belgium and France and the intervention of Italy. Ribbentrop was
received at Rome, with much enthusiasm, the day before he was to
join Hitler and Mussolini at the Brenner for the final endorsement
of the plan of the conquest of the West. It is absurd to ask us to
believe that Hitler was deeply concerned at such a moment to secure
a friendly understanding of which he had not the least need, with
the Pope about Church affairs in Poland and Bohemia. It is still
more absurd to suggest that he wanted an assurance of the loyalty
of the German Catholics, which was never in doubt whatever crime
(not against the Church) Hitler committed. The Annual Register says
that "according to Vatican sources" Ribbentrop had told the Pope in
April that the German troops would be in Paris in June and in 
London in August.

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               25

            THE PIOUS TRAITORS OF BELGIUM AND FRANCE

     The immediate gain of the Church is obvious. Socialism and
Communism were just as dangerous to it in Belgium and France as in
Spain, Austria, Germany, and South America, and a German conquest
of the West automatically involved the complete destruction of
them. It seems to me just as certain that the Vatican was promised,
or foresaw, the seizure of power in France by Petain, Weygand,
Laval, and Darlan and the setting-up of a clerical state. Think of
the situation, as I have described it. Since 1875 French Catholics
had not only never had power in France but had not had a single
statesman until the black Laval wormed and bribed his way in. Now,
in an hour of profound humiliation and misery, priests govern the
men who govern France. The price of power never matters to the
Papacy.

     But a further very important gain was that the transformation
of France into a Catholic state provided a new, and most important
unit for the Pope's plan of a bloc or League -- let us call it a
League -- of Catholic powers. As far as I can trace, this idea of
the Pope was born in the spring or early summer of 1940, which
suggests further evidence that he knew of the coming degradation of
Belgium and France. Slovakia was at that time added, as a Catholic
state, to Italy, Spain, and Portugal. The Pope could have had no
illusion about the value, on a world-scale, of Slovakia, Spain, and
Portugal or the condition of Italy; and the usefulness of the
Spanish-American Republics in a League with European anti-
democratic countries was of still more doubtful value. The United
States, that exasperating democracy that sent so much money to Rome
but compelled its Catholics to profess such adulterated ideas of
the faith, might have something to say. France, a first-class
power, was a different proposition.

     These Catholic states were to be constructed on the lines of
the Papal encyclical of the year 1931 Quadragesimo Anno. The title
-- the title of an encyclical consists of the first two words of
the Latin text -- means "In the fortieth year" and is an indication
that if follows up the "great" encyclical (Rerum Novarum) published
by Leo XIII in 1891. You may know how the world-press applauded
that encyclical and how American apologists still quote it with
pride. It went to the revolutionary length of saying -- in the last
decade of the nineteenth century! -- that a worker must have "a
living wage"; though the Pope, when asked by a Belgium prelate who
was pressed by Socialists, declined to say what is a living wage.
Pacelli, who was firmly in the Secretariat of State by 1931, seems
to have thought that it was a good basis to build upon. I do not
suggest that he wrote it, though to do so required no knowledge of
economics. It is a very long and rambling document, mainly composed
of the familiar solemn clerical platitudes about the wickedness and
folly of the world and the deeper wisdom which the Church is ready
to impart upon all questions if men will only listen.

     You may reflect that you never heard of this important
pronouncement and would like to read it. Unless you read Latin of
the modern Italian type I fear you will not be able to do so.
Though it is intended for the whole world it is written in a dead
language, so the Vatican meant each national branch of the Church
to make a translation of it. I have heard of only two -- German and
French. In Britain at least, no translation was published, and 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               26

            THE PIOUS TRAITORS OF BELGIUM AND FRANCE

there is only a booklet on it (Pope Pius XI and Social
Reconstruction, 1936) which is a paraphrase intended to conceal its
crudities. I can learn of no American translation. Strange, you may
say, if this is the supreme effort of Pacelli and Pius XI on a very
vital question and the document on which these new Catholic states
expressly base themselves.

     It is not really strange. It is a manual of Catholic Fascism,
blending features of Mussolini's Corporative State, the medieval
guilds, and weird Vatican conceptions of modern life. Although
Vichy France, Portugal, Slovakia, etc., appeal to it as their
inspiration it says little about the political form of the state
but clearly assumes that it will be a dictatorship. The main point
is its solution of the larger problem, which is very simple. The
desire of the workers to have unions is, the Pope is gracious
enough to say, legitimate. But must not be democratic and
independent. They must be "directed." The employers also must have
associations -- you see the relation to Mussolini's idea -- and in
case of a difference of opinion representatives of the two bodies
must meet in Christian amity and come to an agreement. It reminds
us of the British industrial experiment of Witney Councils, which
had already been discovered to be useless before Plus XI, or
Pacelli, recommended the idea as original and profound. The Pope
does not say whether the workers or the employers are to have the
marginal superiority or how, in case they are equal, a decision is
to be reached. Such a deadlock, he supposes, cannot arise when both
sides are Catholics. They then see everything in the light of pure
justice.

     But there are incidental passages which made it all the more
inadvisable to translate this gem of Papal wisdom for the workers
of America. What for instance, would they say to this:

     "The workers, sincerely repressing all that feeling of hatred
and envy which agitators in the social Struggle so cunningly
exploit, will not only submit to but highly esteem the position in
human society to which Divine Providence has assigned them (p. 104,
Freiburg edition).

     It is exactly the kind of language which the bishops of the
Church of England addressed to the workers a century and a quarter
ago when they were agitating for the right to form unions. The
worker who sees the marble bathing pools, the rich banquets, the
spacious and luxurious homes of the rich on the screen must, when
he returns to his dingy and uncomfortable home, repress that wicked
feeling of envy and thank Divine Providence for giving him the $15
or $20 a week job. To do otherwise leads to Socialism, and the Pope
settle's the vexed question whether the Vatican no longer condemns
Socialism. "No man", he says (p. 90) "can be a good Catholic and a
good socialist," The priests did not care to let even British
workers see that. As to Communism, it is "impious and wicked", not
simply, as the Pope is now represented as saying, natural virtue to
be condemned only because it has not a Catholic basis (in reality,
a Catholic or priestly boss). There is to be no restriction on a
man's power to make a fortune, but the rich must be generous to the




                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               27

            THE PIOUS TRAITORS OF BELGIUM AND FRANCE

poor. At the same time the Liberal and very American doctrine of
"free competition" is wrong. This is supposed to be a wise Catholic
middle position between the two extremes in contemporary life: a
wonderful example of that famous "wisdom of the Vatican".

     It obviously did not suit the American hierarchy to let the
American public know that their Church condemned unrestricted
individualism and free competition, but the blear-eyed Petain, like
the sleek priest-ruler of Slovakia, the truculent dictator who
protects privilege in Brazil, and the scheming Dr. Salazar of
Portugal found it a useful doctrine. It is, as I said, Mussolini's
Corporative State modified. You may choose to think that these
innocent folk at the Vatican did not realize that Mussolini's
scheme was mainly devised for the purpose of war -- to bring both
the industrialists and the workers under the despotic control of
the State. In any case the Pope puts the Church above the state. He
blandly claims that it is "the supreme authority even in these
economic matters." That also would hardly suit America, but old
Petain would not blink if it claimed to be the supreme authority
even in sanitary matters and sport. He had a vague idea that he
could, on the lines of the Papal encyclical paralyze the great
industries which by their urbanization and stimulation of the
people had certainly promoted the growth of freethought. France was
to be mainly agricultural once more, because peasants are less
quick-witted and anti-clerical, and in such industries as were
permitted the ascendancy of Catholics would be secured, not merely
by the control of Church and State but by giving low wages to all
men who were not married or had not at least three children. By
long tradition, parents of three or more children in France were
almost always Catholics.

     One would not say that the Germans smiled: they must have
roared with laughter. The old fool would serve the immediate
purpose, and their patronage of him and his insipid ideas could be
put on their credit side at the Vatican, which was expected to give
further help in the African Empire and the East. As I write the
Germans seem to be about to dismiss Petain to some country cottage
or home for the aged. The truth about him is breaking through the
Catholic censorship. A series of articles in the Herald-Tribune in
the summer of 1941 by the distinguished French dramatist Henri
Bernstein punctured the Petain clerical legend. He proves that the
"great soldier" was a defeatist in the war of 1914-1918 and wanted
to abandon the English allies to the German's. His coreligionist
Foch had to silence him. It appears even that he never was a great
soldier and "the hero of Verdun." It was the priests who
manufactured his reputation. As I said, for seventy years they had
failed to get a distinguished representative either in
statesmanship, science, philosophy, or history, so in the miserable
prewar period., when they concentrated on pushing into power
political creatures like Laval, literary journalists and soldiers:
men who know nothing outside their special fields and are easy prey
to the clerical sharp.

     Just about the time of the surrender of Paris even the German
papers began to discus's with respect the idea of a Catholic
League. Whether they or the Pope started it I cannot ascertain but
it became an important item in their new program of friendly 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               28

            THE PIOUS TRAITORS OF BELGIUM AND FRANCE

understanding with the Vatican. Catholic papers in England and
Eire, in Portugal, Spain, Spanish America, and Hungary -- and, I
suppose. in the United States -- began to reflect the glory and joy
of the new vision that lit the Papal mind. The great League would
cross the seas and bring in the republics of South America.
"Spaniards", Franco's newspapers said, "are the only ones entitled
to look after Spanish America." Britain and America were saving
Spain from famine and collapse, and its press was telling President
Roosevelt that "his tutorship is unsolicited". Instead of a Nazi
threat to the United States from Latin America there was to be a
Catholic Fascist threat; and the main body of American Catholic's
still praised Petain, Salazar, Franco, and De Valera. Germany
hinted that this was not all. The Pope's eyes began to brighten at
the prospect of Germany conquering the Balkans and destroying for
him the ancient Greek, Russian, Serbian, and other "Orthodox"
Churches which had defied the Papacy for more than a thousand
years. This mighty League, pivoting on Italy, need not fear Hitler
even if he had won his victory and then faced the Vatican without
a mask.

     The Germans, I repeat, must have laughed. Now that Italy was
sucked clean of vitality, or soon would be, the vast German force
would, if necessary, cut through these Catholic powers as easily as
the smaller armies of 1940 had cut through western Europe. When the
time came Germany would take them all over into its servile empire,
their people the helots who would grow food and hew out minerals
for the German workers and industrialists. Any doubt of that after
the terrific strain that the German onslaught has put upon Russia
in spite of its mighty resources and superb heroism would be
ludicrous.

     What would Germany then say to Roman Catholicism. It would
disdainfully sweep aside all its trumpery Catholic-Fascist
institutions. It would enter upon a real "persecution of religion"
such as the modern world has not yet seen. If the Pope murmured
about promises and agreements, the cynical Nazis would remind him
how he was silent year after year when they made solemn agreements
and tore them up. It would remind him how through years of
corruption and dishonor, of bestial cruelty and ruthless
aggression, he had been silent or friendly, solely because he
thought it would ultimately profit his Church. Shall we have to
write in another year or two that atheistic Bolshevism saved the
Papacy as well as European civilization?


                          ****     ****

    Reproducible Electronic Publishing can defeat censorship.



   The Bank of Wisdom is always looking for more of these old,
hidden, suppressed and forgotten books that contain needed facts
and information for today. If you have such books please contact
us, we need to give them back to America.

                          ****     ****


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               29



                        30 page printout

    Reproducible Electronic Publishing can defeat censorship.

          This file, its printout, or copies of either
          are to be copied and given away, but NOT sold.

          Bank of Wisdom, Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                          ****     ****

Edited by E. Haldeman-Julius

THE BLACK INTERNATIONAL                 No. 8

                 THE POPE AND THE ITALIAN JACKAL

         HOW MUSSOLINI'S INVINCIBLE LEGIONS WERE BLESSED

                        by Joseph McCabe

                  HALDEMAN-JULIUS PUBLICATIONS
                     GIRARD  -- : --  KANSAS

                          ****     ****

   CHAPTER

     I    No Tears Over Albania ................................ 1

    II    The Stab in the Back ................................. 7

   III    Greece, Not Being Romanist, Fights .................. 13

    IV    Catholics Hamstring Yugo-Slavia ..................... 20

     V    The Pipe-Dream of Mussolini and the Pope ............ 26

                          ****     ****

                            Chapter I

                      NO TEARS OVER ALBANIA

     Ten years ago that appalling greed which is the principal
dynamo of the barbaric energy that is wrecking the world expressed
itself in four plausible ambitions: those of Nazi Germany, Fascist
Italy, Imperialistic Japan, and the (spiritually) Imperialistic
Vatican. I say plausible because these ambitions were at that time
still restricted within such limits that they could be decked in 
such pretexts (legitimate aspirations, racial unity,
overpopulation, etc.) as would provide a moral evasion for the
democracies whose real motive for inaction was the prospect of the
destruction of Socialism. Japan, which already had and openly
confessed an ambition to conquer and enslave all eastern Asia and
the islands of the Pacific hardly fits into this formula, but in
this series of booklets Japan occupies little space. We have only
to point to the fact, which may be verified in any work of
reference, that just when Japan began brazenly to exhibit its greed
and its callousness, the Vatican entered into diplomatic relations
with it which set the seal of a sacred cooperation upon its
adventures, and that on the eve (March, 1941) of the final, most 

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               1

                 THE POPE AND THE ITALIAN JACKAL

bloody, and most comprehensive extension of the conspiracy against
civilization the Pope gave a most cordial interview and a gold
medal to Japan's most crafty agent, Matsuoka.

     Hitler ten years ago still kept his ambition within the frame-
work of Mein Kampf. The noble German race could not tolerate that
large bodies of its people should be in subjection to inferior
nations (Poland, France, Denmark, Czecho-Slovakia, Switzerland,
etc.) and must gather them into the Reich; and it was necessary for
the full and free development of this Greater Germany that it
should take the Ukraine from what the whole world then agreed with
him to regard as the disreputable and incompetent Bolsheviks. We
have seen how urgently the Vatican was moved by its own policy to
link itself with the adventures of Nazism. The German Catholic
Church was already the richest in the world, or tied for that
position with the American Catholic Church. It faced destruction if
it opposed the Nazis; it could expect an enormous increase of
wealth and power in the Greater Germany if it did not. Moreover,
the Nazis were bound to annihilate its deadly enemy, Socialism, in
Germany and, if they succeeded, in France and Russia. So the
present Pope, who knew Germany intimately and saw, as any schoolboy
could, that its program meant war at least with France and Russia,
and therefore also with Great Britain, helped the Nazis to attain
power and clung to them through years of shame until their prospect
of victory was dimmed by the heroic resistance of Russia and the
help of America.

     All that, and how the Black International in Germany cheered
and blessed every ghastly extension of Hitler's greed when he
realized the incredible complacency of the western democracies, we
have seen. In this book I propose to consider in detail the
relation of the Vatican and the Italian Church to the Fascists: in
particular to the miserable adventurer who dreamed that he would
pass into history as the second Caesar and already finds his place
in it under the particularly odious name of the Jackal -- the
stinking, Blinking, cowardly beast that lets other beasts kill and
fattens on the corpses of their victims. This is the Pope's closest
ally and friend, the leader of the dreamed-of League of Catholic
Fascist powers.

     In another booklet I have summarized the early career of this
gross type of adventures, the beginning of the Vatican's sordid and
venal alliance with him, and the way in which his first outrage,
the rape of Abyssinia, coincided perfectly with the ambition of the
Papacy to recover its control of the Ethiopian Church and was
effusively blessed by the whole Italian hierarchy while the Pope
remained tactically silent. From that time until 1939, the Jackal
got no pickings and saw himself sinking into vassalage to the more
powerful beast and his country despised throughout the world
without the compensation of plunder. Every meeting at the Brenner
or dash of his rabbit-brained son-in-law to Berlin was followed by
a harvest of glory and loot for Hitler -- alone. The warning in
Mein Kampf that Germany could never tolerate a second great power
in Europe was lost on him; and, while he joined gaily and coarsely
in every promise of clerical friendship which Hitler made to small
nations, to keep them quiet until he was ready to rob them,
Mussolini seems not to have reflected that Hitler's promises to 
himself might be equally cynical.

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               2

                 THE POPE AND THE ITALIAN JACKAL

     During these years the Pope remained, we will not say on
cordial terms but at least in alliance with the treacherous
warmonger, and the Italian hierarchy and priesthood acclaimed every
step he took and every crude boast he made as enthusiastically as
the German bishops supported Hitler. Between the Mediterranean and
the frontier of Holland several hundred Catholic bishops and
quarter of a million priests, nuns, monks, and clerical agents did
what the Catholic apologist calls the beneficent work of his Church
in guiding the world, and almost without exception they were
servile in their flattery of the two dictators who were rapidly
dragging down Europe to the level of the savage. This chorus now
includes the bishops and priests of France, Belgium, and Holland as
well as those of Spain, Portugal, Italy, Austria, Czecho-Slovakia,
Hungary, and Germany.

     In the face of this situation the American Catholic plea that
we must relieve the Pope of responsibility for the action of local
hierarchies is seen to be ludicrous. One local hierarchy might at
some time be betrayed by its dread of offending its nation into a
morally indefensible position, and we should then expect the Papacy
to rebuke it as it rebuked the American bishops and archbishops in
1899. But here we have ten of the most important local hierarchies
of the Church united, under the eyes of the Vatican, for years in
praise and support of the worst evil that has befallen civilization
in modern times. Add the prelates and priests of the Latin-American
Republics and those who supported Japan in that country and China
and you have nine-tenths of the bishops and priests of the Catholic
world blessing corruption; and even in the remaining tenth many
speak very hesitatingly, if at all, for the cause of humanity and
civilization.

     Let us distinctly understand that these priests and bishops,
encouraged by the Pope's refusal to censure or to break relations
with their brutal rulers, supported them in every step they took.
I have shown elsewhere that the whole Italian Church rejoiced
boisterously over the conquest of Abyssinia and that the Pope, who
is now said by Cardinal Hinsley to have called it a "barbarous
outrage", gave the supreme gift to womanhood of his Church, the
Golden Rose, to the Queen of Italy in her character of Empress of
Abyssinia. That easy piece of conquest had proved of great value to
the Church, but of practically none to Italy. The chief motive of
it had been the personal ambition of Mussolini to avenge a
humiliating defeat that the Italians had earlier suffered in
Abyssinia and to create something that he could call a Roman
Empire. One would not be surprised if he thought the Italian people
would in time put the purple mantle on his own shoulders.

     Since that time he had waited impatiently for his share in the
Axis-loot, and at the beginning of 1939 he decided to add Albania
to the glorious new Roman Empire. In the midst of his preparations
the old Pope died and Pacelli became Pius XII. Partly in order to
obscure his alliance with the dictators Catholic writers have said
that Mussolini opposed the election of Pacelli. He wanted a
"religious" Pope -- a man who would attend exclusively to Church
matters and leave rulers and statesmen to act as they pleased --
not a "political" Pope like Pacelli. If anybody can point to any
act or word of Pacelli during the preceding ten year's as Secretary


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               3

                 THE POPE AND THE ITALIAN JACKAL

of State which challenged Mussolini we might entertain the story.
There was no such act or word, except an occasional lament of
breaches of the Concordat; and these things never troubled
Mussolini or Hitler because they never weakened or disturbed the
loyalty of their local Churches. Papal policy went on without a
change. The man who had been the power behind the throne was now on
the throne.

     As to the statement that the new Pope was greatly distressed
at the invasion of Albania, it is just one of those anonymous
extenuations of a Pope's blunders or crimes. Pius XII was crowned
on March 12 (1939), and the Italian troops crossed to Albania on
April 7. That date was Good Friday, and a pious churchman might be
annoyed at the choice; and a further possible annoyance was that
the Pope was busy preparing his beautiful Easter message on peace
which in the circumstances jarred on the ears of many. But it would
be sheer folly to suggest that the Pope did not know that Mussolini
was going to annex Albania. Month's of preparation are required for
an overseas expedition of half a million men with modern equipment.
At the very time when the Pope was crowned the tanks must have been
rumbling along the roads of Italy, and the men and material and
ships must have been gathering at Brindisi long before the date of
sailing. But to understand fully the relation of the Vatican to
that piece of imperialist filibustering we must know something
about the character of Albania.

     It was little more than a word even to thoughtful people
before 1939 and was totally unknown to the millions. I confess that
I was myself surprised when, a few years earlier, one of the
pilgrims to my house, a cultivated and substantial young man who
was taking a post-graduate course at London University, told me
that he was an Albanian. An amazing illustration of the general
ignorance and lack of interest is seen in the Catholic
Encyclopedia, which was, of course, written many years before the
invasion. It gives estimates of the number of Albanians varying
from one to nearly two millions -- in a Supplement 20 years later
the figure is given as 850,000, which is not far wrong -- and says
that "the best of the population is Catholic." I may be wrong but
I doubt if the reader would understand from this that little more
than one-tenth of the population were Catholics, and that these
nearly all lived in a half-civilized condition in the mountains of
the north. The Catholic writer praises their virtue and then admits
that until recent time's they had a tradition of kidnapping
handsome Turkish girls and carrying them off to the mountains; but
I must add that they gave them the sacraments of (compulsory)
baptism and marriage before sleeping with them. The violent
passions that were displayed in their feuds were notorious
throughout south-eastern Europe. It was through these densely
illiterate and priest-ridden highlanders, the Mirdites and Shoshi,
that Mussolini began to engineer the "invitation" to him to take
over the country.

     As the "conquest" was almost entirely won by bribery of the
Albanians and lying to their neighbors we should find the Vatican's
share in the responsibility comparatively mild and will not linger
over it. Briefly, Albania is an outlying fragment of the Turkish
Empire which in the fifteenth century took over the lands of the 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               4

                 THE POPE AND THE ITALIAN JACKAL

old Greek Roman Empire. It lay on the very edge of the Greek world,
separated by a wall of religious hatred from the Roman world, and,
being in addition very mountainous, remained, like all countries
(Ireland, etc.) in that geographical position, very backward. The
Turks never quite subdued the primitive mountaineers of the north,
and they kept their Catholic faith all through the Moslem days. In
1939 there were about 700,000 Moslem in the country, 200,000
Orthodox (non-Roman) Catholics, and 100,000 Roman Catholics. The
Pope, as in the case of Abyssinia, looked to Italian rule to bring
under his control the 200,000 dissident Catholics and as many of
the Moslem as possible. One really finds it easier to believe that
the Pope on that Good Priday prayed very fervently for the success
of the Italian arms. And he had, as so often happens, a little
friend at court. The pretty Queen Geraldine was a Catholic, and
poor Zog little dreamed when he built a luxurious chapel for her a
few years earlier and gave her a suite of chaplains that soon he
would be flying over the hills with the crown jewels.

     Here again the interests of the imperialist adventurer and the
spiritualistic imperialist neatly coincided. Mussolini, already
conscious that the leading burglar had altered his plan of dividing
the spoils -- Hitler to have Europe north of the Danube and
Mussolini all to the south of it -- wanted at least to make sure of
Greece and Yugo-glavia as a bastian of his Medeteiranean and
African Empire. Some say that he surprised and annoyed Mussolini by
his "conquest" -- it cost him the lives of 12 men of his invincible
legions -- of Albania. Not likely. He knew of Mussolini's
preparations, for Italy swarmed with his spies, and he says that
when the time came to attack Greece and Yugo-Slavia the possession
of Albania, a few hours' sail from Italy, would be a great
advantage to both. To say that the Pope was not in their counsels
seems, as I said, ridiculous. Within a week of his coronation the
Pope had a visit from Clano and on the following day one from the
Prince of Piedmont. A survey of some such summary of the world-news
as that in Keesing's 'Contemporary Archives' will show that the
relations of the Vatican with the Italian government were
particularly good that year. In December Mussolini appointed a
formal 'ambassador at the Papal Court, and the year ended with the
sumptuous visit of the king and queen to the Vatican (December 21)
and the rare event of the Pope taking his Christmas greeting in
person to the palace, (28) as I have elsewhere described. Albania
did not ruffle a hair of the Pope's head.

     We must, as I said, take into consideration that the conquest
was practically bloodless, the way having been so thoroughly
prepared with gold. In 1915 the Allied powers, looking for bits of
territory with which to bribe possible supporters like Serbia and
Greece, had decided to cut up Albania. Italy had saved it and in
time made it a nominally independent kingdom. Mussolini's
"patronage" became so onerous and ominous, however, that King Zog
became restless and it was decided to evict him and open one of the
gates to Greece. Everybody will remember how Mussolini's shrewish
daughter and her popinjay of a husband, who fairly clearly fancied
themselves as future empress and emperor, had white horses in
reserve for their triumphal entry into Athens. Not less eagerly did
the Pope look forward to that event as the beginning of his
conquest of the Greek Church and other National Catholic Churches 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               5

                 THE POPE AND THE ITALIAN JACKAL

which scorned Rome's claim of supremacy. But it will be well to
postpone to the last chapter a consideration of the grandiose plan
of an oriental counterpoise to the influence which the wealth of
the great democracies was giving them in the Church.

     We should, however, notice in conclusion that while the
conquest of Albania was almost bloodless, it was won by such
corruption and perfidy that the Pope's virtual blessing of it again
puts him in the gang. It was by a lavish expenditure of money that
Mussolini, the man who wrote that war alone enobles a man,
prevented serious resistance and induced the "notables" of Albania
to desert Zog and offer the crown to the king of Italy. This was
sordid enough, but the deception of Greece and Yugo-Slavia, which
were alarmed to get the Italian army at their frontiers, was
revolting; if we can find any sympathy for any statesmen in Europe
who believed a word that the dictators said after five years of
lying and repudiation of agreements.

     Roosevelt had asked the pair of arch-criminals to sign an
agreement to refrain from any aggressive movement for ten year's,
and Mussolini had, with an air of pain and sorrow, refused to sign
such a document on the ground that it was an insult to suggest that
he might have any such intention. There was a more direct and
brazen deception of Yugo-Slavia and Greece. Every statesman knew
that Mussolini's imperialist program demanded, not Albania, which
was of little value except as a route to Greece, but the Yugo-
Slavian coast of the Adriatic, to the north of it, which had
splendid harbors (in which the eastern coast of Italy is very
deficient) and was part of the old Roman Empire. Italy gave a
solemn assurance to Belgrade that the annexing of Albania need not
give it the least concern. The Greeks knew that Italy coveted the
island of Corfu, off the southern coast of Albania, and they and
the British asked for assurances. They got them in profusion; --
and it seems a mystery unless you keep in mind always that Italy
and Germany were destroying Socialism for the capitalists of the
world -- believed them. On December 10 the Grand Council of
Fascism, Mussolini's chief mouthpiece, gravely announced to the
world that it was "the desire of Italy to 'see order and peace
maintained and consolidated in the Balkan and Danubian areas", and
this would be better promoted by Hungary, Rumania, Yugo-Slavia, and
Greece refraining from entering into Balkan defensive alliance
which Britain and France urged them to form. They consented, and
Hungary and Rumania -- both in close touch with the Vatican --
began at once to drift into the German sphere of influence.

     Under shelter of this camouflage-screen of lies the two
dictators, sure of peace on their eastern and southern frontiers,
pushed on their preparations for the great spring offensive in the
west. The Pope professed to believe the protests of Mussolini and
his Grand Council. He ended the year, as I said, although it had
witnessed the ruthless destruction of Catholic Poland, in a quite
exceptional round of chaste Christmas festivities and issued his
biennial essay on the beauty of peace. As Hitler had not yet
approached the major clauses of his program -- war upon Russia for
the Ukraine and upon France for the recovery of Alsace-Lorraine. --
I leave to others the analysis of the Pope's mind. My own
suggestions would be malicious. But one fact stands clear of all 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               6

                 THE POPE AND THE ITALIAN JACKAL

guesses and conjectures. He had never passed one word of censure on
the gross deceptions and cynical breaches of the assurances given
to the world by his allies in 1939. By that time the reassuring
documents signed or issued by Japan, Germany, and Italy and
brazenly repudiated by later action -- often a few months later --
would have papered a commodious dining-room. Never has the Pope
condemned that perfidy of his allies which was making international
faith a lost quality of the wicked nineteenth century or one
reserved to the "impious" Bolsheviks.


                           Chapter II

                      THE STAB IN THE BACK

     It will be part of the puzzle of our age to the future
historian to discover why anybody was ever taken by surprise by any
of the terrible outrages that, occurred every few months. The
program, of the great international bandits had been before the
world for years, and Hitler's program included, and emphasized in
many chapters of his book, a war of revenge on France, the recovery
of Alsace-Lorraine, and the truculent statement that France was so
degenerate, so debased with Negro blood, that it must be blotted
out forever from the company of European powers. To plead in
extenuation that Hitler never permitted a full foreign translation
of his book is childish. Every foreign office in the world and
large numbers of journalists knew its contents. For such follies as
Chamberlain accepting the word of Hitler that he had abandoned
those plans, or the French accepting a similar statement in an
interview which Hitler gave a French Fascist journalist, or almost
unanimous silence of the world-press there is, as I have repeatedly
said, only one explanation: so eager were they all for the
destruction of Socialism, which Hitler and Mussolini promised, that
they mistook the knife of an assassin for the scalpel of a surgeon.
If that is difficult to believe think out, if you can, some other
explanation; and study the action of the bankers and industrialists
of France today who are actually cooperating in a New Order that
merely postpones their annihilation.

     Whether the Pope was surprised by the war in the west I have
discussed in other booklets. I could at that time quote no
authority to support me in my suggestion that the Pope was fully
informed of the plot before even the invasion of Norway. I told,
from the Papal newspaper itself, how Ribbentrop was sent to see the
Pope a few days before Hitler met Mussolini at the Brenner to
arrange the date of his intervention and how the Osservatore
reflected the joyous expectation of the Vatican that a very
important agreement was to be signed. The only plausible theory of
this is that Hitler wanted the cooperation, which he got, of the
Catholics of Belgium and France, and that the Pope demanded so high
a price for his services that a month of hard bargaining followed.
But the Italian Church and the Vatican emphatically endorsed the
action of the Belgian and French Catholic traitors -- Leopold,
Petain, Laval, Weygand, and Darlan -- and the Church gained
mightily in France. Within the last week or two the 1940 volume of
the Annual Register has appeared and that weighty and quite
impartial authority says, drawing upon "Vatican sources", that 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               7

                 THE POPE AND THE ITALIAN JACKAL

Ribbentrop told the Pope that "German soldiers would be in Paris by
June and in London by August". This was on March 11, 1940. Shirer
confirms that some hard bargaining between the Vatican and Germany
went on at this time. He says that Msgr Orsenigo, the Nuncio at
Berlin "had been quietly paying visits to the Wilhelmsstrasse for
weeks" (Berlin Diary, p. 234).

     The Catholic has the consolation of knowing that the Pope
sacredly guarded the confidence that was made to him. At least I
assume the Catholic will regard that as a virtue. Britain and
France had declared war on Germany and must have expected attack.
The Pope alone knew, outside a narrow Nazi and Fascist circle, that
it was to be delivered at that time and in that fashion, so that it
would probably be fatal to France. But he virtuously kept the
secret to himself. Some folk, looking back on all the horrors that
followed and confronting all the horrors that may yet come as the
treachery of Vichy deepens, may even say that there are more
precious things than virtue; or that the Pope's firmness on this
one point while he virtually encouraged his three allies in years
of deceit, corruption, and savagery reminds them of an earlier
moralist who rebuked a man for straining at a gnat and swallowing
a camel.

     We will not suppose that Pius XII knew all the methods which
Germany had used in preparing France for its baptism of blood and
transformation into a real Catholic country. There were even anti-
Nazi folk who blamed me when I suggested that it used the sexual
attraction of women as well as the zeal of priest's and priest-
ridden folk. But it is still doing this. I have before me an
article in which a man who has just come from Portugal describes
how that country is being prepared for bloodless conquest. Amongst
other things he says:

     "A social layer has also been imported, including many-lingual
Aryan titled women whose morals are at the service of the Fuehrer.
The line is to attract the snub element among the Portuguese"
(London Evening Standard, November 4 -- the most conservative
evening paper in Britain).

     One wonders if this new type of "vice-squad" includes some of
the dainty aristocratic ladies who did such good work for Hitler in
Paris before 1939. Even those of us who are not puritans find this
method of preparing the way for "glorious victories" revolting. No
trick is too dirty for the Pope's allies, On the same day comes the
news that Hitler's men are castrating bodies of the finest youths
of Czecho-Slovakia and that they have 10,000 British uniforms ready
for treacherous use in the East. The priests follow up the Gestapo
to castrate what they call men's souls.

     A second method in which the Vatican cooperated with Italy and
Germany in securing the success of the war in the West was by
continuing to denounce Soviet Russia. Whether or no Hitler really 
feared that Russia would move in the Balkans while he was busy in
the west, it is a fact that he and Mussolini and the Vatican used
this suggestion to divert the attention of the Balkan powers from
their real danger and bind Hungary and Rumania closer to Germany.
All through the winter of 1939-1940, when preparations were being 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               8

                 THE POPE AND THE ITALIAN JACKAL

made for operations in the west, the conduct of the Fascists was as
crooked and deceptive as that of Germany and Japan. Mussolini
bellowed about the peace of Europe and the threat to it from
Russia. His people were solemnly assured, as they had been after
the annexation of Abyssinia, that unless Russia struck all that
they had to do was to make economic profit out of Germany's war
with France and Britain. It was said that Italy even offered to
sell planes to France but Hitler forbade it. On the other hand when
Britain held up German ships carrying coal to Italy the Italian
press was let loose in full fury upon it. Perfidious Albion was
said even to be at the back of the Russian menace and the Russian
seizure of part of Poland and Finland.

     It is fortunate that we have not here to attempt to
disentangle the apparent confusion of the first quarter of 1940,
with Germany an ally of Russia on the one hand and with Mussolini,
its bitterest enemy, on the other. We know now, of course, that the
Russo-German agreement was a sham on both sides. The real tragedy
of it is that a just, and honest, not to say friendly, approach to
Russia on the part of Great Britain and France would have prevented
this postponement of Russia's intervention in the war and might
have averted terrible evils and sufferings from Europe. Russia, it
is true, did not consider itself ready for war in 1939, but neither
had Germany one-half the equipment which it would have in 1941,
with the forges of Europe pouring out steel and the fields growing
food for it from Poland to Belgium, from Scandinavia to Spain. A
crucial factor in the whole horrible development is that hatred of
Russia which the Papacy had done even more than the capitalists to
inflame in every part of the world.

     In March, as we saw, the Pope was informed of the plan to
invade the West which had been maturing all through the winter. We
must assume that in the course of the heated argument in which
Ribbentrop assured the Pope that the German troops would be in
Paris by June he explained that the great barrier of the Maginot
Line, on which Britain and France relied to an amazing extent,
would be turned by an invasion of Holland and Belgium. Whether the
Pope was informed also of the coming intervention of Italy we do
not know. The story was put out, by one of the very useful
anonymous purveyors of information in the service of the Vatican
that when Mussolini at length approached a declaration of war on
France the Pope wrote him a letter begging him to refrain (New York
Times, June 5). Professor La Piana observes that "if this letter is
not another fiction like the mythical letter supposed to have been
written in 1914 by Pius X to the Emperor of Austria, the Duce must
have thrown it into the waste-paper basket, for on June 11 the
heroic gesture of striking the nation already defeated by Germany
was made", and the Vatican adopted "an attitude of complete
reserve". There has never been an official claim that such a letter
was written, and just one month earlier the Duce had shown how
little he respected the Pope's wishes by peremptorily and
successfully ordering him to discontinue publishing British war-
news in his paper.

     But Professor La Piana (of Harvard), writing in the Nation in
March, 1941, goes on to show how, whatever reserve the Pope
maintained -- for a week or two, let me add -- the Italian Church 
supported the action of Mussolini with its usual enthusiasm. The 

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               9

                 THE POPE AND THE ITALIAN JACKAL

American paper's which reproduced Roosevelt's description of
Mussolini's action -- "the hand that held the dagger plunged it
into the back of its neighbor" -- did not speak of the joy of the
Italian Church. As if to excuse the Vatican in advance the Rome
correspondent of the New York Times (June 12) quoted from Vatican
sources -- "semiofficial" this time it seems -- that "the attitude
and responsibility of the Vatican are entirely separate from those
of the Italian clergy and the Italian Catholics". If there was one
national hierarchy in the world that was strictly controlled by the
Vatican it was surely that of Italy; and, in fact, the Italian
clergy were as strictly pledged as the Vatican never to take part
in polities, These agreements of the Church to avoid politics seem
always to have the unwritten clause "on the wrong side". The
Italian Church went beyond the bulk of the people of Italy, who
notoriously did not want war, in cheering Mussolini, but, since the
papers of France, Britain, and America could be relied upon not to
reproduce the words of the bishops, that was safe and profitable
interference in politics. But the Pope's words would probably be
reproduced in every country so he must keep "an attitude of
complete reserve".

     On Catholic theory, and in any case, bishops and priests no
more approve injustice than Pope's do, but I need only quote one or
two instances from Professor La Piana's article. On June 16 the
Archbishop of Gorizia exhorted his people in a pastoral letter --
one of several issued at that time -- to "lift reverent thoughts to
the ever victorious King and Emperor and to the undefeated Duce:
may God bless and protect him." Cardinal Schuster, head of the
Italian Church, visited soldier's in the barracks at Milan and
"distributed blessed medals to bring luck to the Italian armies".
The Civilia Catholica, which is almost as much an organ of the
Vatican as the Osservatore, urged the soldiers to "shed their blood
for the cause blessed by their religion." On June 27th, when France
was prostrate in the dust, thirty Italian bishops gave away one of
the reasons for their joy, and one that must have been very active
in the Vatican. They urged the Duce to "crown the unfailing victory
of our army" by taking the Holy Land from French and British hands
and putting it, on the religious side, under the Pope. This, they
said, would fitly express "the harmony between the civilized people
of Imperial and Christian Rome". The shrines of the Holy Land are,
I need not recall, almost as profitable as Monte Carlo, which was
to have been, he thought, one of Mussolini's rewards, but we will
consider the oriental policy of the Vatican in the last chapter.

     Note the reference in the letter of the Italian bishops to
"the civilized people of Imperial and Christian Rome". The rest of
the world used very different language about their enthusiasm for
Mussolini's action. We should, it is true, not regard the whole
Italian people as approving it, but the above quotations show that
the Catholics of Italy -- and of Spain, Portugal, Slovakia, Brazil,
etc. -- joyously supported it. In America and Britain the more
Papal Catholics followed the Pope's example of "complete reserve"
for every decent non-Catholic about them considered that this act
alone justifies us in calling Mussolini the Jackal. Some writers
say that he incurred the anger and contempt of Hitler by holding
off from intervention until France was mortally wounded. I prefer
to think that they were in agreement, but at Mussolini's 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               10

                 THE POPE AND THE ITALIAN JACKAL

suggestion. As a member of the diplomatic corps in Rome said:
"Mussolini does not want to fight a sick man: he wants to gouge the
eyes out of a corpse." Some such language was used wherever tongues
and pens were free, and non-Catholic.

     To the last moment Mussolini had maintained his policy of
craft and deceit. He continued to fool Britain with trade-talks.
When, in May, Roosevelt asked for a declaration of his intention,
he declared that he had no intention of entering the war. It is
true that as Germany bowled over country after country his press
began to complain of the "ring of steel" that the British command
of the Mediterranean drew round Italy and hymns of hate even for
children, began to be heard. But Ciano, the Jackal's pup, still
thought he was fooling the British representatives with trade-
talks, though as Chamberlain had now given place to Churchill
probably no one was duped. At the beginning of June the World Fair,
which had until that date been announced to be held in Rome, was
"postponed", and the sailing of Italian liners was canceled. And on
June 10 Romans were summoned not by blare of trumpets but by cards,
to come to the Palazzo Venezia to listen to the final lie. He
declared that "Italy has done everything possible to arrest this
terrible war" -- which he had jubilantly arranged with Hitler at
the Brenner a few weeks earlier -- but must now face "the risks (!)
and sacrifices" which the wickedness of France and Britain forced
upon it. He added, as if he luxuriated in lying: "I do solemnly
declare that I do not intend to involve other nations in the
struggle" and expressly called upon Yugo-Slavia, Greece, and Turkey
to "take notice of these words of mine". Witnesses say that the
great body of the people who were in the square heard him and
departed in silence, and a gloom settled upon Italy. But the
church-bells rang, and the bishops hung their consecrated garlands
on the bull-neck of the brutal adventurer.

     The Pope's "complete reserve" lasted until Petain sat firmly
-- I mean was held firmly by Darlan and Weygand -- in the saddle,
and Catholic papers all over the world, even in England (as I
quoted), rejoiced at the glorious state into which the "heroic soul
of France" had passed, if a little tarnished in the wings.
Socialism, Communism, Freemasonry, and Freethought, which for 60
years, to the deep concern of the Vatican, had kept four-fifths of
the French people out of the Church, were swept away by the German
flood. By a sudden change which any observer in Europe would have
pronounced forever impossible a year earlier the government was
solidly Catholic, and decrees which transformed the country on the
lines of the Papal encyclical poured out from Vichy. It looked as
if England was now surely doomed -- even in friendly America the
betting was against its chance of survival -- and the brutal
soldiers who had effected this marvelous recovery of the Church in
Spain, Czecho-Slovakia, Belgium, and France had made good their
boast that they would settle the map of Europe and Germany's
domination of it for a century.

     With the recovery of France and Belgium the Vatican had, by a
swish of the German sabre, turned 40,000,000 "bad Catholics" into
"good Catholics -- into men and women who must hide the truth in
their hearts and lie (attending church, etc.) with their actions.
Think of Italy, Spain, Austria, Czecho-Slovakia and South America. 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               11

                 THE POPE AND THE ITALIAN JACKAL

What a miracle of Church-growth Pacelli had witnessed since he had
taken office in the Secretariat of State in 1929! Or ought we to
say, what a stupendous recovery of Church-power he had effected by
his alliance with Mussolini and Hitler? Can anybody doubt, in view
of this outcome of the invasion of the West, that he had in fact
known in advance of the plan and approved, if not assisted, it?

     Consider also the subsequent course of events in France. The
Germans used the armistice-conditions, to which Petain had
consented with an express, if childish, reliance on the "honor" of
the German commanders, with all the treachery and brutality which
were now a normal part of their behavior. "Armistice-commissions",
consisting of soldiers in mufti, gestapo men, engineers, looters,
etc., were sent to every part of the French empire to prepare the
way for the occupation which they had sworn they did not
contemplate. They plundered France, down to its door-knobs and
bath-taps, from Metz to Marseilles. With mocking courtesy they paid
useless paper for the silks and scents and wines of which they
stripped the stores of France to send to their wives and friends in
Germany. They appropriated half the food-supply, cattle, and
poultry and, while they gorged on them, told the half-starved women
and children to apply to America or draw upon French Africa, and
then took 60 percent, in addition of what was imported. They
brought vast numbers of their own women and children to feed on
France and to laugh at the humanity of British bombers who would
spare French civilian towns. They compelled the workers, under
threat of starvation, from Belgium to Bordeaux, to make munitions
for use against the only nation which was trying to deliver them.

     But perhaps such matters cannot concern a Pope whose mind is
occupied with higher things; though we do seem to have heard of him
sending, when it suited the interest of the Church, Red Cross
supplies to the East. What else did the Germans do? They applied in
ten-fold force that brutal and immoral doctrine of Prussian
militarism, that ten innocent civilians must be murdered if one who
is guilty cannot be detected. The world was deeply stirred by these
batches of murder in fifties, but the Pope and the French bishops
were silent; and the priest-ridden Petitin was content to appeal to
the French people to "stop these criminal outrages against the
troops of occupation!" It is true that we get the usual
unauthorized report that the Pope protested through his Berlin
Nuncio, but we have grown a little cynical about these reports.

     The Pope and the French bishops were still silent when Germany
pressed Petain to tear off the one rag of "honor" he had kept at
his surrender: his vow that he would never under any circumstances
hand over the French fleet or French ports in Africa for use
against Britain. Petain's Catholic colleagues are in favor of it,
and the prelates, the guardians of the honor of Catholic France,
are not interested. That is politic's. As I write the news comes
that a number of the common priests of France are stung to attack
their bishops for their cooperation with this corrupt and cowardly
gang at Vichy: a gang which, with German collaboration, uses every
device to spread hatred of England and may soon crown their infamy
by causing the ugliest and most revolting of all the evil
outgrowths of their policy: war between France and England. Already
Moslem writers in Turkey are commenting with cynical disgust on the


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               12

                 THE POPE AND THE ITALIAN JACKAL

prospect, which seems to them to open, of the fleet of Christian
Britain and America at war with the fleet of Christian France in
the Mediterranean; the prospect of a Church-ruled France spending
its blood on behalf of the power which has always been its
bitterest foe and under its present rulers is sworn to annihilate
France! In view of Hitler's repeated words about France and what he
is actually doing in Poland and Czecho-Slovakia one would very
seriously expect the castration of Frenchmen on a ghastly scale
when the war is over. And the Pope keeps to his policy of "complete
reserve" and permits (or directs) his Black International in France
to support cordially, because they are useful to the Church, the
miserable or stupid Vichy gang who thus betray the high honor of
France and the first principles of civilization.


                           Chapter III

               GREECE, NOT BEING ROMANIST, FIGHTS

     Mussolini was troubled by the disgust with which the better
elements in Italy itself regarded his vile conduct in regard to
France. His servile press attempted to excuse it by a campaign of
lies about France and Britain, while thoughtful folk still had
fresh in their minds the treacherous negotiations which he had
Ciano conduct with Britain until the last moment. The Black
International of Italy applauded his act with their customary
fervor, but we have the assurance of one neutral visitor after
another that the urban and better-educated Italians loathe him and
his entanglement with Germany, which alone now saves him from
destruction. From the year in which, for a heavy bribe, he
sacrificed his convictions and the dearly-purchased liberties of
Italy to begin the destruction of Socialism for the Church, throne,
and capitalism he has brought misery upon the beautiful land.

     That is not rhetoric. It is a cold summary of the statistics,
published by the Italian government itself year by year and found
in any good reference-book to which we look for a more reliable
estimate of a country's social and economic health than we are
likely to get from political partisans. They show that Italy is a
land of poverty staggering under a stupendous load of internal
debt.

     Two things only, apart from debt and crime, can boast of
growth in Italy under Mussolini: the Church and the Army. The
Church has incalculably more power and much more wealth than it has
had at any time since 1870. Through its cooperation with Fascism it
has acquired a supremacy which any educated Italian before 1929
would pronounce, whether he was Catholic or not, absolutely
inconceivable in modern Italy. It's medieval Canon Law, which was
regarded as dead, is embodied in the civil law and it controls
education. It has seen the deadly enemies against whom it was
fighting a losing battle -- Liberalism, Socialism, Communism,
Freemasonry, and Freethought -- fall under the blood-dripping
fascist axe. Small wonder that it loyally carries out the contract
of service which it signed in 1929 -- to use all its influence to
keep the Italian people obedient to their Fascist masters.



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               13

                 THE POPE AND THE ITALIAN JACKAL

     You may have noticed little indications of secrecy, of hidden
motivation, in those references to British or American intrigues to
get Italy out of the war that one sees occasionally in the papers.
This furtiveness does not mean only that international capital
wants to be sure that Socialism will not, as Cardinal Hinsley
predicted, succeed to the power of Mussolini. It means that
American and British Catholics fear still more the consequences to
the Church of such a revolution. In no other country in the world
can Socialists chant with deeper historical sincerity: "Our Flag is
red with martyrs' blood." Some day they may be so wicked as to
retaliate. You see, they are without "the restraints of religion".

     Mussolini thought that he could disarm the anger of his
freethinking Fascist follower's at this restoration of the medieval
powers of the Church by making Italy a formidable military nation
and restoring the Roman Empire. The second line of his original
appeal to the country, after the proposal to destroy Socialism, was
that Italy had been scurvily treated at Versailles because the
other powers regarded it as too weak to give any trouble. In point
of fact it had been treated more generously than its services in
the last war merited, but Mussolini soon found that if you roar a
lie loud enough it has the accents of truth. He has spoken and
written in praise of war -- any war -- more crudely than Hitler and
has demanded floods of babies to make great armies. Not that he has
any military ability. He never led anything but a mob with cudgels
against a weaker mob. It is a fiction that he was wounded in the
last war, and, while Hitler can certainly boast that he led the
start of the Nazi march on Berlin -- even if he has to liquidate
any man who recalls that he ran like a hare at the first shot --
Mussolini remained 200 miles away from the Fascist march on Rome,
until he heard that there was no shooting. However, the army,
acting with the throne and capital, had put him in power, and he
set out to drain Italy of its scanty wealth to equip his invincible
legions.

     It is one of the most pathetic chapters of his story. In the
old democratic days when we used to argue whether a strong man
would not rule the state, better than the many-headed some of us
were willing to entertain the idea that, at least, he would be more
effective in the military field. Italian soldiers are as brave as
any but somehow they have written a sorry page of military history.
They will hardly boast of the conquest of Abyssinia, which reminds
us of a squad of gunmen firing into kids on the streetwalk,
especially as the upshot was to present the half-starved people
with a desolation, and now they have lost even that. In Spain on a
famous occasion they fled like rabbits before the Spanish workers.
In Albania they were even worse humiliated, and on "Our Sea," the
Mediterranean, their ships scurry to port at sight of an enemy. It
has become a joke that the Italians excel in all speed-records.
They wait until France is in agony to declare war on it; and they
then learn, when they ask for their share of the loot, that even
the Germans have a contempt for the military machine that Mussolini
has created.

     So Mussolini, seeing his demand of Corsica, Savoy, Malta,
Tunisia and the Suez as far as ever from being satisfied, seeing
his new empire of sand and rock slipping away, decided to start on 
Greece. He proceeded loyally on the lines of the New Order, the New

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               14

                 THE POPE AND THE ITALIAN JACKAL

Chivalry. We saw that when he attacked Albania he gave a most
solemn assurance to the Greeks that he did not covet and would not
try to get a single square mile of their territory. In September
(1939) he renewed this assurance in a diplomatic correspondence
with Athens. But after his cowardly attack on France and his
failure to get a single advantage from it he had to find some way
of restoring his prestige. Some writers suggest that he was jealous
of Hitler and wanted to show that he could win glorious victories
without Hitler's advice or help. Doubtless he had some such idea,
but he met Hitler at the Brenner on October 4 and quite certainly
discussed with him the war he was to begin only three weeks later.

     In this age of "invincible might," when you want to smooth the
way for the legions as much as possible, you do not "declare war".
Some think that that is a practice of the Age of Chivalry, the
spirit of which has been suffocated by our modern skepticism and
materialism. Rubbish. The Middle Ages were a time of equal
treachery and brutality. It was in that dreadful 19th century that
nations used to give each other warning that they were going to
war, and it is precisely to the standards of the Age of Chivalry,
slightly adulterated with Nordic valor -- this may give three
hours' notice, during the night, that it is opening fire -- that
our Clerical-Fascist age has returned. It is true that since the
Italian people themselves had to be prepared, Mussolini got his
press to belch journalistic fire at the Greeks and writhe over the
"atrocities" the Greeks were committing; and as the Greeks had not
at that time any idea of the ease with which they could sweep the
Italians before them they nervously disproved the lies and tried to
disarm the wrath of Italy.

     There was considerable strain but certainly no one thought of
war when the Italian minister at Athens sent out invitations for a
very festive reception of Greek ministers and foreign
representatives at the Italian Legation on the night of October 27.
If I here go into detail a little more than usual you will
understand what sort of thing it really was that the Italian
archbishops and bishops boisterously approved, as usual, and the
Pope did not recognize as deserving of censure. The dance was in
full swing when, at 2:30 a.m., the Italian minister politely
explained to his Greek guests that he must leave them for an hour.
All the Greek ministers were present except General Mataxas, the
Premier, and, as the Italian minister was absenting himself to
deliver a virtual declaration of immediate war on them one will
probably have to search long in recent history to find a parallel
to this infamy of the Pope's ally.

     At 3 a.m. he presented himself at the house of General Metaxas
and handed him an ultimatum, of the kind Hitler had several times 
delivered. It reaffirmed all the lies about atrocities and said
that unless the Greeks accepted this charge and handed over certain
strong strategic positions of theirs "to the Albanians" by 6 a.m.
(three hours later) they were at war with Italy! When Metaxas asked
what these strategic points were the Italian minister said that he
did not know. Thus do invincible legions, unlike effete
democracies, begin their wars. The invasion of Greece, which was
fully prepared, began at once; and the whole free world rejoiced
when, three weeks later, they heard that the Italians had been 
swept out of Greece and were making for the sea.

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               15

                 THE POPE AND THE ITALIAN JACKAL

     It sounds, perhaps, rather cheap to say: The Greeks, not being
Romanists, fight, I am, of course, thinking mainly of the contrast
with Belgium and France, not foolishly suggesting that Catholic
soldiers are less brave than others. But there is another aspect of
the matter, and it concerns us here. The treachery of Belgium and
France was, we saw, mainly due to a few highly-placed Roman
Catholics who are, to say the least, in very good odor at the
Vatican. In Greece there were no Roman Catholics in positions of
influence, and the support of the Vatican was entirely on the side
of the invaders. There was no Petain or Weygand to recommend the
abject surrender of the Greek army, no Level to corrupt the
politicians and induce them to listen to the traitors, no Darlan to
present the bitterest enemy of the country with its fleet, no
cardinal-archbishop to murmur to the people: God wills it. So the
Greeks fought, and with a heroism which surprised even those of us
who thought we knew them.

     It will be convenient to reserve the Vatican's policy in the
East for adequate treatment in the last chapter of this book, but
a few words must be said here about its application to Greece. The
main Christian body in eastern Europe -- broadly, east of a line
drawn from the Adriatic to the Polish-Russian frontier -- and
nearer Asia calls itself "Orthodox Catholicism" and, whereas it
used to be ruled by the Patriarch of Constantinople, it has broken
into a number of national Churches (Serb, Bulgar, Rumanian,
Russian, and Greek). The name itself suggests that, as we shall see
later, the Churches differ from the Roman only in trifling points
of doctrine and, in fact, consider themselves more orthodox than
the Roman. When I say "trifling" I speak of course, as an Ishmael.
The chief point of difference, which stirs passions to white heat
and has led to the shedding of much blood, is whether Jesus (who
foresaw the 1700 years of bitter conflict) did or did not mean the
Roman bishops, when such a thing came into existence, to rule the
whole Church. The Greeks repudiated the claim as soon as it was
raised in the second century and have repudiated it, on every note
of scorn, anger, and disdain, ever since. And during the whole
period there was a corresponding eagerness at Rome to bring them
into subjection. By centuries of experience the Vatican knows that
argument is useless, since its claim rests on a tissue of lies, and
it has at all times looked to national disasters to compel the
orientals to compromise with their faith.

     We moderns are inclined to regard these things as lingering
follies of the Middle Ages, like astrology or occultism, and 
impatiently ignore them, but they are vitally relevant to the
question of the Black International and the War. As I will show
later, Rome has looked to the East more covetously than ever during
the last half century when the growth of the democratic element in
the Church owing to its position in the United States, the British
Empire, France, and pre-nazi Germany disturbed the essentially
oriental mind of the Vatican. I travelled extensively in Greece
about Seventeen years ago and noticed that the French, who were
then cooperating closely with the Vatican, were surprisingly busy
with indirect proselytism. Even in very backward Crete French nuns
had opened schools. The kind of education they gave was, of course,
ludicrous. There is in Candida a museum of quite exceptional
interest but when I ask one of these French-educated young women 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               16

                 THE POPE AND THE ITALIAN JACKAL

where it was, she said: "What is a museum?" It is a pure Greek
word, and she had lived within half a mile of this famous museum
all her life! The whole purpose of the education was to inspire
respect for France and the Roman Church.

     How the French, under the direction of the Vatican, lost all
the ground they had gained, turned the respect of the Greeks into
hatred, and made way for the Germans, by helping the Turks to
defeat the Greeks I have explained elsewhere. Constantinople was at
that time under an International Commission. The Turkish troops
were fenced off a score of miles away, and Constantinople, without
any sort of real force or authority in it, lay open to the large
Greek army which I saw preparing to march upon it from Adrianople.
But the Vatican was very strongly opposed to the Greeks taking over
the ancient metropolis of oriental Christendom, as this would have
given the heads of the Greek Church a commanding position, in the
Orthodox world. At this time, we must remember, the Orthodox Church
was in ruins both in Russia and Turkey, and the heads of the Greek
Church were as eager to reorganize and control them as the Vatican
was.

     Such was the situation in Greece before the war. The Vatican-
French treachery had made the Greeks more bitter than ever against
Rome, and in 1940 there were only about 35,000 Roman Catholics in
the entire population of 6,300,000. The Vatican now looked to Italy
to promote its ambition to secure religious control of the East,
and its interests so closely coincide with the greed of the
Fascists that we are not surprised that in this case we do not get
even one of those unauthorized claims that the Pope sent a letter
of protest to the King of Italy about the repulsive treachery of
the attack on Greece. He very studiously said nothing.

     I am not in these booklets trying to drag in the Vatican at
every step. There is no need for straining the evidence or starting
suspicions. When we tell all the facts, as so very few papers or
writers do, we find that there is not a section of the world-
battlefield in which the interests of the Papacy do not coincide
with the aim of the brutal aggressions of the Axis. That is a
simple issue and easily proved. The recklessness of procedure is on
the part of Catholics who ask us to believe that, while there is in
fact this coincidence, the Pope is far too austere and mindful of
the interests of civilization to take advantage of it. We have seen
the opposite in every chapter.

     But the hope of Mussolini and the Pope that Greece and the
route to Egypt and the East could be secured without the
intervention of the Nazis, who would as usual take nine-tenths of
the spoils, broke against the splendid spirit of the Greeks. On
November 18 Mussolini again summoned the Roman people to the
Palazzo Venezia and roared to them that his legions were marching
to victory. They were, as all the rest of the world knew, marching
-- and very smartly -- in the opposite direction and were beginning
to lose even Albania. One wonders what would have happened, and how
much the world-tragedy might have been shortened, if the Yugo-Slavs
had joined the Greeks at that time and the British had moved more 




                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               17

                 THE POPE AND THE ITALIAN JACKAL

swiftly and generously to their aid. A splendid barrier of
mountains stretched from the Adriatic to the Aegean, and what the 
Greeks, Serbs, and British did with comparatively weak forces in
1941 shows what might have been done while the Greeks were still
fresh in 1940.

     Am I going to drag in the Vatican here also? There is no need.
It is impossible to ignore its work when you consider all the
facts. It was the Vatican, acting, through the Catholic Croats and
in the closest association with Mussolini, that prevented, or
played a very important part in preventing, the unity of Yugo-
Slavia, which, after the expulsion of the pro-German Regent, was
effected too late to save the country. That we shall see in the
next chapter, but a few words must be said about the base conduct
of Hungary and Rumania -- and with certain reserves we must add
Bulgaria -- which enabled Hitler to move gigantic forces to the
very frontier of Greece and Yugo-Slavia while still protesting that
he sought only to maintain peace in south-eastern Europe.

     Hungary, which has saddened it's admirers, of whom I count
myself one, by licking the jack-boots of Germany and lying down to
be trodden on by its troops in their treacherous march eastward, is
in effect a Catholic country, and its Catholic hierarchy has been
for some years in the closest touch with the Vatican. It therefore
lays no strain upon our judgment to find evidence of Roman
influence on its rulers.

     The Magyars, a very estimable people and superior to the
Rumanians, Serbs, and Bulgarians by their long absorption of
Austrian culture, are, as everybody knows, of Asiatic origin, but
their subjection to Austria during centuries enabled the Roman
Church to capture most of them. Catholics are, it is true, only 65
percent of the population, but Protestants are only 35 percent, so
that the Catholic hierarchy has almost a monopoly of ecclesiastical
power, and this is significant in a land that is still
overwhelmingly religious. In the year 1937 the Church held its
great international festival at Budapest, and Cardinal Pacelli went
in person to preside, The fact that it is an unusual honor for the
Papal Secretary of State to make much a journey shows what interest
Pacelli had in the Church's policy in that country, and not even a
more solidly Catholic country ever received the Pope's
representative more ceremoniously. The dictator, the fleetless
admiral, Horthy, is a Protestant, but he lodged Pacelli in the
royal palace, and the foreign correspondents commented on the
cordial friendship that ensued.

     It was the time when the simple-minded Mussolini's belief that
Hitler was leaving to him the control of Austria, Hungary, the
Balkan countries, and the Near East was being rudely disturbed.
Hungary, which had followed his model of dictatorship, had for
years looked to him. Now that Hitler had annexed Austria it had
reconsidered its interests and drawn nearer to Germany; and with
Germany Pacelli was, we saw, pressing hard at that time for an
ever-closer alliance. Horthy dragged his country into an
enthusiastic cooperation with Germany in the destruction of Czecho-
Slovakia; and the Vatican, we also saw, was equally interested in
that shameless outrage.


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               18

                 THE POPE AND THE ITALIAN JACKAL

     For historical reasons into which I cannot enter here the
Magyars hated the Czechs as much as they hated the Russians, and
they would need little persuasion from Pacelli to throw open their
roads, rails, and river to the men who were going to crush
Bolshevism in Russia, which was the ostensible aim at that time of
Germany's thrust eastward. They hated also the Serbs, and in this
case no one who has travelled from Budapest to Belgrade over the
immense fertile country they lost to Serbia can fail to sympathize
with them; though the chief guilt must be allotted to the
Versailles Conference. When, therefore, Mussolini so pitifully
failed in his campaign to win Greece for Italy and the Vatican and
Hitler proposed to shift his victorious armies from France -- no
foreigners had hailed the miserable Vichy group more loudly than
the Catholic Magyars -- they strewed his route with flowers. The
first stage in the Papal crusade for the extinction of Bolshevism
in Russia was opening. We will, of course, not forget that Horthy
and his sleek supporters were just as anxious for political reasons
to see the central shrine of Socialism destroyed and that they have
made great profit by their alliance with Germany. Yet the
coincidence of the interest of the Church of Rome and its paramount
position in Hungary must be equally recognized. A few years after
the close of the last war, travelling through Hungary, I found the
Magyars looking to the British more than to any other country in
Europe. German gold and ecclesiastical intrigue have changed all
that.

     Bulgaria and Rumania have, like Greece, very small and
powerless Roman Catholic minorities: 45,000 in 6,500,000 in
Bulgaria and about one million out of 15,000,000 in Rumania. More
than 80 percent of the inhabitants of each country belong to
national branches of the Orthodox Church which broke away from the
Greek Patriarchate at Constantinople in the nineteenth century.
Their interest from our present viewpoint is that they are sections
of that vast world of anti-Papal Catholicism which the Papacy hopes
to control through the victories of Hitler and Mussolini. I could
quote evidence from the Osservatore that there was much activity of
Rumanian and Hungarian bishops at the Vatican, but we will not be
tempted to exaggerate their influence.

     It may not be without interest to the reader to point out that
the Black (Orthodox) International in Rumania and Bulgaria is quite
as bad as its Roman counterpart. In both, countries the priests
have been silent while, in the last ten years, the freedom which
the people had won by their revolt against Turkish rule has been
strangled by Fascism, and in both the great body of the clergy are
as gross as they were in Russia before the Revolution. I liked the
Bulgars better than the Serbs when I moved amongst them, but the
face's of the peasants in a crowd in which I was packed one holiday
are still vivid to me in their sheer animality. We hear of no
clerical protests against the appalling outrages these Bulgar
peasants have committed in the villages they have taken from the
defeated Serbs and Greeks. For decades they have given, unrebuked,
free rein to the most violent inter-racial passions and religious
hatreds.





                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               19

                 THE POPE AND THE ITALIAN JACKAL

     The leading authority on religion in this part of the world,
Stephen Graham, himself a devout member of the Church of England, 
which has tried for years to outstrip Rome in getting reunion with
them, assures us (Stephen Graham's News-Letter, July, 1941) that
the Rumanian priests are as gross as those of Russia were in
Tsarist days, yet that they and their people were disgusted with
the political -- I would almost say Romanist -- subservience of the
higher ecclesiastical authorities. The picturesque Carol adopted
Fascism on Italian lines in 1939 and Nazism of the German type or
an iron tyranny, in 1940. He demanded and got the support of the
bishops. Graham says:

     "Both clergy and laity were angered and disillusioned by the
subservient attitude of the higher ecclesiastical administration to
the misdeeds of the government, which, indeed, reached such a point
that the Church approved from the pulpit terrible murders and
horrors which had been unknown hitherto in the political history of
Rumania" (p. 3).

     The Rumanian Church had so strongly supported the murderous
Iron Guard that the blackguards actually pressed it to canonize the
notorious Codreanu! This passage is taken from a religious news
sheet, the chief aim of which is to win an admiring interest in the
Orthodox Churches.

     The Balkan problem -- the Balkan Cauldron experts have called
it for years -- is very complicated, and Versailles made it far
worse by its transfers of territory from one to another. All the
Balkan and Danubian countries feared Germany, but the fate of
Poland, and later Norway, Denmark, Holland, and Belgium warned them
what to expect. They preferred the unheroic virtue of the Swiss and
Swedes who boast that they have kept out of the war. "Why should we
disturb you", a German recently said to one o these Swiss boasters,
"when you provide us with 4,000,000 slaves who feed themselves?"
Ingloriously their capitalists put on fat from war and food
supplies to Germany and close their eyes to what would happen if
Germany won. One thing only could have saved the Balkans: a loyal
and determined League. But the languid efforts of France and
Britain to secure it were mocked by the customary vigor, ability,
and unscrupulousness of the German effort to prevent it. Until 1940
this job had in the main been left to the Italians, and I have
shown how the Black International worked with them. This was most
notable of all in Yugo-Slavia upon which, and Greece, the armored
divisions of Germany now converged along the friendly route
provided by Hungary, Rumania, and Bulgaria.


                           Chapter IV

                 CATHOLICS HAMSTRING YUGOSLAVIA

     The uncouth name Yugo-Slavia -- the land of the "Southern
Slavs" -- had to be coined by Versailles for the state, the bundle
of very varied and conflicting Slav provinces, which it created as
a reward for Serbia for its loyalty in the last war. It is true
that the overwhelming majority of the 14,000,000 people are Slavs,
but when you remember that the bitterly antagonistic Poles and 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               20

                 THE POPE AND THE ITALIAN JACKAL

Russians are both Slavs you smile at the idea that this slender
racial bond must make for brotherhood. Blood may be thicker than
water but it has no priests to chant its virtues. It is far feebler
than the influence of a creed in an illiterate and priest-ridden
population.

     And Yugo-Slavia might be called a natural battle-ground of
creeds. The Serbs -- they dislike the common practice of calling
them Servians as the word is derived from the Latin for "slaves" --
the main body of the population and the highest (or least backward)
in culture, belong to a Serb Orthodox Church, a national branch of
the oriental Christianity which spread over Europe from
Constantinople to Russia and the Balkans. They form about half (48
percent) of the population but are the ruling class and have
certainly been autocratic in their treatment of the provinces which
were annexed to their kingdom by Versailles on the specious ground
that they were once part of the ancient kingdom of Serbia and their
people are of the same race as the Serbs. The real reason was, as
I said, that during the last war the Allied statesmen had made
lavish promises of territory to keep Serbia and Greece from
submitting to Germany. The Germans and Italians now, naturally,
posed as the redeemers of oppressed national fragments from "the
injustices of Versailles", and the Italians have inflamed the
rebellious feelings of the minorities (whose territory they wanted
for Italy) almost from the date of Mussolini assuming power.

     But what concerns us here is that to the racial subdivision
there was added the far fiercer flame of religious hatred, the feud
of the Orthodox and the Roman Churches. On this the Italians
relied, and they had the very zealous assistance of the local and
the Italian hierarchy and the Pope. I have described the historic
line of separation of the Latin and Greek Churches as running,
broadly, from the Adriatic to the Russo-Polish frontier, which is
the general line, in the south, of division of the Latin and Greek
halves of the old Roman Empire. But the Latins always claimed the
land (Dalmatia) to the east of this which is now a province of
Yugo-Slavia and is as resolutely sought, on account of its good
harbors by the Italians. East of this again are the non-Serb
provinces of Monte-negro, Bosnia, Herzegovina, and Slovenia. These
became part of the Turkish Empire in Europe, and the population of
Bosnia is still mainly Moslem. But at the break-up of the Turkish
Empire in Europe they passed to Austria-Hungary, and, though they
hated it, its priests "converted" large numbers to the Roman faith.
It is in this northern fringe of Yugo-Slavia, from the sea to
Slovenia, that the 5,000,000 Roman Catholics, as against the
7,000,000 Orthodox Catholics of Serbia, live. You have a useful
analogy in the case of Irish Catholics being controlled by English
Protestants, but in Yugo-Slavia the Romanists were much nearer in
number to the Orthodox, and their next-door neighbor, Italy, was a
great power that had every interest in inflaming the religious
quarrel with the Serbs. Of late years the next neighbor, Hungary,
has also intrigued to recover control of the provinces, and its
Catholic clergy have been just as interested as the politicians.

     The situation is, as will now be understood, very complicated,
and the kingdom of Yugo-Slavia has been so unstable since 1919 that
many experts predicted that the next European war would originate 
there. It will be remembered that it was the assassination of an 

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               21

                 THE POPE AND THE ITALIAN JACKAL

Austrian Archduke in that region which gave the Kaiser the pretext
for starting the war of 1914. What the experts and the papers
always hesitate to point out, however, from fear of Catholic
reprisals, is that the Roman Church was just as much interested is
Mussolini in detaching these Catholic regions from the rule of the
Orthodox clergy and bringing them under Catholic Italy and Hungary.

     This intrigue naturally became more active as the Vatican
enlarged its ambition and began to dream of taking over the various
sections of the Orthodox Church itself. As we shall see, the only
difference in point of doctrine, the manner of the "procession" of
the Holy Ghost from the Father and the Son, is one of which these
illiterate masses cannot have even the glimmer of an understanding.
I doubt if you would get even one in 10,000 educated American
Catholic's to give you an intelligible idea of the dogma. The hard
core of resistance is to the Pope's claim of authority, and this is
not a matter of argument. Count Sforza tells us in one of his works
that when he spoke to the Serb Patriarch about the Roman attempt's
to effect a union that prelate replied: "There is only one obstacle
-- the vanity of the Bishop of Rome". In such cases Rome has always
found political power much more effective than persuasion.

     Mussolini was put in power by the army and the capitalists of
Italy in 1924, and it was part of the program by which he had won
a large and empty-headed following of ex-soldiers that he would win
that part of Yugo-Slavia of which, he said, the Versailles
Conference, had cheated Italy. Very widespread unemployment had
followed the demobilization of the army, and the unscrupulous Duce
easily traced this to the evil conduct of Versailles. Italian
intrigues on the other side of the Adriatic was doubled after the
infamous bargain of the Vatican with the Fascists in 1929. By 1932
there were bloody riots against the pro-Italians in Yugo-Slavia,
and the religious element in the intrigue was so obvious that in
1933 the Jesuits and certain congregations of nuns were suppressed.
For the last ten years, in fact, the bitter quarrel of Croats and
Serbs which did more than anything to weaken the defence of the
country has been so patently religious as well as political that
the leading authority, Stephen Graham, an Anglo-Catholic, says
(Stephen Graham's News-Letter, March, 1940) of the struggle of the
Croats: "This is a Catholic movement and has to some extent
affinity to Rome and Budapest." He later explains this "affinity"
to mean that the movement was subsidized by Roman and Hungarian
gold, and he declares that half the bitterness is due to the feud
of the Roman Catholics and Orthodox Catholics: in other words, to
the greed of the rival branches of the Black International for
wealth and power.

     Into the maze of Yugo-Slav politics which arose from this
situation I must not enter. Suffice it to say that the Serb
government, which was more than half-Fascist, relying on electoral
corruption and a muzzled press, was violently assailed by a
combination of Serb radicals and agrarians with the Catholic
Croats. This gave the Vatican an opportunity for one of those
underhand interferences in politics which, though heatedly denied
by Catholics at the time, transpire by the dozen in later history.
Just as the Church had offered to sell -- to procure in return for
advantages to itself -- the docility of Irish Catholics to England 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               22

                 THE POPE AND THE ITALIAN JACKAL

and of Polish Catholics to Germany, as we read in the official life
of Leo XIII, or as it offered to keep the Alsace-Lorrainers docile
to France, so it would use its Black International in Croatia to
damp the fires of the agitation if the Serb government would grant
its requirements. Pacelli was now Secretary of State and the
characteristic author of this proposal.

     All through history the Papacy has made these secret
agreements with monarchs, while its local priest's posed as ardent
supporters of the people's patriotism. It makes a mockery of the,
parrot-cry that the Pope never interferes in politics. Political
activity is turned into a pure moral duty by recalling to the
people, when it is in the interest of the Church, such texts as
"Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's" or "Be ye subject
to the higher powers." It is the duty of the Church to enforce the
words of Jesus and Paul.

     The Concordat was secretly signed by Pacelli and the heads of
the Serb government in 1935. It gave the Roman Church a number of
new bishoprics and raised some bishops to the rank of arch-bishops.
It authorized priests to give Roman Catholic instruction to their
children in the public schools and undertook to enforce legally the
promise of an Orthodox partner to a mixed marriage that all
children of the marriage should be Roman Catholics even if the
Orthodox parent repented of having given the promise. It even
embodied in the civil law the provision of the Canon Law that a
Catholic priest could not be condemned in the ordinary civil court
for certain grave offenses. It was a monstrous price to pay for a
promise that the Croat and Slovene and Dalmatian priests would be
ordered to drop their political encouragement of the rebels and use
their influence to cheek the agitation. When, in fact, the terms
leaked out there was such widespread indignation that the Serb
government dared not present the Concordat to Congress for
ratification. The Croats themselves realized that it was an attempt
to sell their patriotism and resented it. When at length, in 1937,
the government, seeing the gathering gloom in Europe and the need
for political unity, presented to Congress a Bill based upon the
agreement with the Vatican, there was a procession of bishops and
priests through the streets of Belgrade, and the Holy Synod
excommunicated the Premier and all who voted for the Bill.

     The Concordat was never ratified but these facts will be
enough to convince any man of the justice of the title of this
chapter. Even when autonomy was granted to the Croats in 1939 the
religious feud continued. The situation of the country gave the
greatest concern in spite of the soothing assurance's of the pro-
German Regent. Austria had gone and the fatal wound been inflicted
on Czecho-Slovakia in 1938. The black shadow of German militarism
crept nearer, and the statesmen of the western democracies hugged
their policy of appeasement like little girls hugging a pretty
doll. Mussolini struck in Albania, and Hitler completed the
destruction of Czecho-Slovakia and began to talk about Dantzig.
Schacht, Germany's economic wizard, came to Yugo-Slavia and bound
it to Germany by arranging a monopoly of half its trade. Yet, in
spite of the reiterated statements of Italy and Germany that Yugo-
Slovia was not in the least danger the wiser of its statesmen saw
through the trickery and tried in vain to unite with Hungary, 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               23

                 THE POPE AND THE ITALIAN JACKAL

Rumania, Bulgaria, and Greece for self-protection. There were
nominal adhesions, but signed and sealed international compacts
were by this time a dollar a dozen in Europe. German penetration
increased. The invasion of "tourists" went on, and the Fascist
Regent Paul advised the formation of a complete Corporative State.

     I must confine myself here to the share of the Black
International in prolonging the period of discussion and weakness
until it was too late to save Yugo-Slavia. The leader of the
Catholic Slovenes was, like the leader of the Catholic Slovaks in
Czecho-Slovakla, a political priest, Father Koroshits, and he was
so open a Fascist that he got himself appointed Minister of
Education in the Serb government. The Croats continued throughout
1940 to agitate for independence and began to look to the Germans
as deliverers from the tyranny of the Serbs. When, in April, the
Germans occupied the Croat provinces and they declared themselves
independent of Serbia, the declaration was followed by a band
playing "Deutschland Uber Alle's" (Annual Register).

     The war was as repulsive in its beginning as all other
enterprises of the leaders of that New Order with which the Church
co-operates everywhere. Too late the Serbs realized the treachery
of the Regent and dismissed him (March 29, 1941). Germany and Italy
(which had been effusive in its professions of friendship
throughout 1940) fabricated the usual atrocity stories and posed as
the saviors of the poor down-trodden minorities. Historians will
one day raise a question of the sanity of this age of ours. Who,
they will ask, could be deceived by this trickery after four or
five un-scrupulous uses of it? Why make any excuse at all if you
mean to violate international law by deceiving your opponent until
the last hour? What can be the mentality of men who think that
neutrals must not say a word about the vile and unprecedented
outrages they commit because they blandly describe it as "total
war"? And what shall we say of bodies of Christian clergy and their
bishops who will not even whisper that their "total war" is just a
reintroduction of savagery into warfare and who excuse their own
cowardice or self-interest on the plea that they are prevented by
their sacred office from interfering in politics?

     The blow was launched on April 12. There are military expert's
today who wonder whether Hitler did not make a fatal blunder in
engaging in the very costly campaigns in Yugo-Slavia and Greece
instead of advancing upon Russia in the spring: which is equivalent
to saying that he had not even the shadow of a military excuse for
his ghastly treatment of the two small countries. Certainly they
would not have deserted their neutrality if he had pushed on to
Russia through Hungary, Rumania, and Bulgaria. If the plan was to
level a route to Turkey and the East it has obviously miscarried.
However, we are here concerned with the share of the Black
International.

     There have been men and women of honor in all ages who have
refused to accept any profit or advantage from a dishonorable act.
The Papacy and the Black International never did. They at once
consolidated their gain in respect of the first of their aims: the
detachment of the Catholics of Croatia, Dalmatia, and Slovenia.
Croatia was relinquished to the Italians who created a kingdom for 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               24

                 THE POPE AND THE ITALIAN JACKAL

one of their princes and let the Roman Church get busy everywhere.
So brutally was the work done that the highest authority was
conferred on a man, Anton Pavelitsch, who was notoriously a leader
of a gang that specialized in the kind of murder that is politely
called assassination. A French court had found him guilty of
implication in the murder of King Alexander and had sentenced him
to death. He had escaped and lived under the protection of Italy
until the day of his usefulness to Italy and the Church arrived.

     Under this Catholic ruffian the Romanist priests at once
entered upon the same kind of brutal coercion of members of the
Orthodox Church as the Polish priests had conducted in the Galician
Ukraine. In November a British paper that is usually careful not to
offend Catholics, the News Chronicle, reported as follows:

     "Four bishops and 100 priests of the Orthodox Church at
Noshia, Croatia, have been murdered, it is stated. The Patriarch
Gavrilo has been ill-treated and imprisoned in a monastery at
Belgrade, and the Archbishop of Zagreb has been whipped and
banished to Belgrade. The Serbian priests have been replaced by
Bulgarians. The Hungarians also are stated to have hanged a number
of priest."

     This news gets through because not a word in it suggests to
the general reader that the Church of Rome is responsible for these
murders. In the light of the explanations I have given my readers
will have no difficulty. They will readily understand that the
Bulgarian priests who were substituted for the murdered Orthodox
priests were certainly not priests of the Bulgarian Orthodox Church
which is as hateful to the Vatican as the Serb Orthodox Church.
They were Bulgar Roman priests who had to be brought in because the
Croats are bitterly opposed to Italians. Notice also the reference
to the Catholic Hungarians. Only a few months before Hungary had
signed a pact of lasting peace and eternal friendship with Yugo-
Slavia. Now its priest-ridden peasant soldiers behave like savages
to the Slavs who belong to the wrong Church.

     I, as, I said, do not drag in the Church. You cannot lift a
corner of this veil of tragedy that lies upon Europe without
finding its ministers there, and always on the side of the Axis and
its Catholic satellites. The Church, Catholic papers and orators
tell you, is, and must be, neutral. Isn't it a singular thing that
wherever we turn we find it supporting the forces of barbarity and
drawing profit from their victories? A strange neutrality! The
plain truth is that it is neutral, and very scrupulously neutral,
only as regards the support of the forces that in the name of
civilization are trying to cheek the hordes of savagery. But we
shall see this more plainly if we devote a chapter to the
coincidence of the aims of the Church and those of its White
Knight, the Italian Jackal.









                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               25

                 THE POPE AND THE ITALIAN JACKAL

                            Chapter V

            THE PIPE-DREAM OF MUSSOLINI AND THE POPE

     My experience in lecturing to skeptical audiences in Britain, 
especially when questions are invited after the lecture, is that no
part of my message to them is so apt to be challenged as my
indictment of the Roman Church. I very commonly find myself
contradicted by Freethinkers, sometimes lecturers or writers on
Freethought, who try to persuade the audience that from the
circumstances of my earlier life my knowledge is less broad than
theirs or that I have a "complex" in regards to the Papacy. They
are apt to protest, with an air of superior knowledge or
liberality, that "one Church is just as bad as another." How any
man can say anything so stupid when, as even school-children know,
the Church of Rome adds a score of absurd doctrines (confession,
indulgences, transubstantiation, etc.) to those doctrines which are
common to all the main branches of the Christian Church and most of
these doctrines are notoriously medieval fabrications for the sole
purpose of enhancing the power of the priests it is difficult to
understand. But the man who protests that he means that all
Churches are equally bad in practice or in their mischievous
influence on life betrays how scanty and superficial is his
knowledge of history and his analysis of contemporary life,

     The general public, relying for most of its information upon
a press which is compelled by Catholic influence to suppress large
numbers of facts of vital importance, can be excused for ignorance
of the particular mischievousness of the Black International. That
religion is of great importance in maintaining the standard of our
civilization is a cliche of modern editorials and is unfortunately
stated too often in recent sociological manuals; and to this is
very often added a special tribute to "the venerable Church of
Rome", its "august head", and its international organization of (on
the latest claim I find in a Catholic Directory) 360,000,000
Catholics. Hence such charges as I here bring against the Black
International seem to a member of the general public strange and
strained. He had understood that it was just a question whether the
Pope could or could not be expected to censure Hitler or Mussolini,
and, in fact, that the Pope had frequently censured the former. I
have shown that in ten years of increasing menace to civilization
the Church has never censured either of the master-bandits except
when they refused to carry out their promises to itself, but it is
far more important to realize yet almost totally hidden from the
general public that the ambition of the Papal Church coincides in
a remarkable manner with the ambition of the arch-murderers and
fully explain its cooperation with them.

     This has appeared at each step we have taken in the present
booklet, and it will be well in conclusion to make it our direct
theme for a few pages. The ambition of the Black International
coincides in two directions with that of the gangsters who
terrorize half the world today. The first point is that the Papacy
deeply desires that, extinction of Socialism which Fascists and
Nazis have accomplished in a score of countries and promise, if
their armies are victorious, to accomplish everywhere. I have shown
this, and will further enlarge on it in a booklet on Russia. But I 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               26

                 THE POPE AND THE ITALIAN JACKAL

would remind the reader how this consistent and essential policy of
the Vatican is only a continuation of the policy of violence it has
sustained since it acquired power in the fourth century. From the
reawakening of Europe in the twelfth century to the French
Revolution it has had millions of victims; and of the half-million
unarmed men and women who have been put to death for demanding
democracy in the state and freedom of discussion in religion
between the French and the Russian Revolutions all but a few
thousand were done to death by Catholic authorities cooperating
with and instigated by their priests. That fact alone makes a
mockery of the foolish cry that "one Church is as bad as another".
And if the leader will recall the facts I gave in the first and
second books of this series -- that Catholic countries almost alone
support the enemies of the human race today, that they are
themselves on the Pope's recommendation or approval practically all
Fascist, and so on -- he will have a much clearer understanding of
the world-situation. But I have space only to deal with the common
aim of Mussolini (and now of Hitler) and the Pope, and this again
is to a great extent rooted in Rome's real hatred and dread of
democracy.

     In their survey of the conflicts of national aims during the
last hundred years historians very commonly use a German phrase
(Drang nach Osten), to express a fundamental cause of clashes. It
means "the drive to the East" and, since what we call the Far East
is shut out from the horizon of European powers by the vast
wilderness of eastern and central Asia, it means an urge to expand
south-eastward in Europe: the lure of the sun, the blue sea, and
the warm fertile lands that the Greeks felt 3000 years ago, that
led even Napoleon into a rash adventure, and that has been an
important factor in European polities ever since. Germany at the
close of the last century impelled Russia to adventures in the Far
East (and its first clash with Japan) so as to divert its ambition
from Greece, Turkey, and the Near East, which Germany itself
coveted.

     Mussolini's dream of restoring the Roman Empire necessarily
included this expansion. He began, we saw, by dangling before the
eyes of the more thoughtless Italians a promise that he would get,
by war a few provinces (Dalmatia, Corsica, Malta, etc.) that ought
to belong to Italy. When he saw how supinely the western world
tolerated the growth of his army and his ambition he dreamed of
becoming an Augustus or a Diocletian. The Roman Empire once spread
over the Balkans, Egypt, and Asia Minor as far as Persia. The new
eagles of the new invincible legions would advance along the same
routes.

     What concerns us is that the Papacy even more cordially
supported him in his larger and more mischievous ambition than in
the earlier. The Vatican was little interested in the transfer of
Dalmatia, Savoy, and Corsica, which were already Catholic, but the
dream of an Italian Empire such as Mussolini now imagined was a
very different matter. Just such a dream had fascinated the Vatican
itself for nearly a century. It was called the reunion of the
Churches, but the Vatican knew from painful experience of the
futility of its missionaries that it would accomplish nothing
without compulsion. It had in recent years an emphatic assurance of


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               27

                 THE POPE AND THE ITALIAN JACKAL

this. The Poles, as I explained elsewhere, took over several
million Orthodox Catholics in the provinces which Versailles took
from Russia for them, but argument about the supreme position of
the Pope was found to be entirely useless and the most savage
persecution had to be employed to persuade some of them that the
Pope is the real Father of All Christians.

     Greek and other oriental Catholics had, as I said, for the
most part repudiated the Pope's claim ever since it was fabricated
in the second century, but Rome had never despaired of securing
their submission. By the Middle Ages these easterners were so
hardened in their anti-Roman faith that argument was useless, and
the Popes had to look out for political opportunities. Thus
Innocent III, the greatest of the Popes, promised to overlook the
appalling behavior of his Crusaders in the thirteenth century --
instead of going to "the Holy Land" they took Christian
Constantinople and robbed and desecrated its churches -- if they
would secure the submission of the Greek Church to him. When the,
Turks in the fifteenth century swept over the Greek Empire and the
Greeks appealed to the Pope to rouse Christendom to a new Crusade
he tried to make it a condition that the Greek Church should first
submit to him. The Turks mastered the whole of the Greek empire and
for several centuries suspended communication between East and
West, but when, in the second half of the nineteenth century, the
Turks had degenerated -- that is to say, their Sultans and ruling
class degenerated, for the Turkish people were as robust and decent
as ever -- while the peoples of Europe got modern armaments and
detached province after province from the Turkish Empire, the
ambition of the Papacy revived.

     It was then that Greece, Rumania, Bulgaria, and Serbia won
their independence of the Turks and the higher clergy in each
decided, in harmony with the patriotic movement, to declare their
independence of the Patriarch at Constantinople (the Greek Pope)
and set up the national Greek (and Russian), Rumanian, Bulgar, and
Serb Orthodox Churches. Since no such thing as a Church, much less
a supreme head of the Church, is contemplated in the New Testament
-- the text about Peter and the Church is, of course, a late and
ridiculous interpolation -- they had the right to do so, but we
should understand that it is just these rival ambitions of the
higher clergy in each country that prevent union. The Roman Church
likes to call it "reunion" but the Churches were united on the
basis of Papal supremacy which Rome declares essential. The
statement on the subject in the Catholic Encyclopedia, that in the
early ages all churches in East and West acknowledged the supremacy
of the Roman bishops is the high-water mark of "Catholic Truth",
for it is exactly the reverse of the truth. In doctrine there is
only one major point that divides the Latin and oriental Catholics,
and no one but a trained theologian can understand the verbiage in
which the difference is expressed. According to the Latins the Holy
Ghost "proceed's" from (but is co-eternal with) the Father and the
Son, but according to the Greeks from the Father only. Ask the most
cultivated or most zealous of your Catholic friends what that means
and, if you do not give him time to consult his Encyclopedia -- ten
to one his priest cannot explain it -- yon will be entertained.




                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               28

                 THE POPE AND THE ITALIAN JACKAL

     This break-up of the Turkish empire and of the spiritual
kingdom of the Greek Pope stirred the Vatican to a new hope. Leo
XIII began 70 years ago to make preparations for the conquest of
the eastern Churches, of which only small fragments here and there,
called Uniates, were subject to Rome. Benedict XV resumed the work
in 1917, when the Turks were hard pressed by the Allies, and the
late Pope Pius XI took a most ardent interest in the work. Special
colleges and sections of the Congregation of Propaganda at Rome
prepare priests for the great work of taking over. But the Vatican
is aware that there is not the least prospect of winning the
easterners by argument and it, as in all previous ages and as in
the "reunion" of its tens of millions of apostates in Italy, Spain,
France, and Spanish America, bases its entire hope of a spiritual
conquest upon a political or military conquest of the Balkan
countries and the Near East by some power with which it has an
understanding. There are in these countries, apart from Russia, to
which I will devote a special book, about 50,000,000 Catholics and
only about 7,000,000 of them acknowledge the Pope. It is, surely,
now as plain why the Pope never condemned the brutal invasion of
Greece and Yugo-Slavia as why he never condemned the treatment of
France.

     The British Catholic writer W. Teeting (The Pope in Politics)
gives another reason, and it is sound, though American Catholics do
all in their power to suppress it. He says of the late Pope (whose
policy the present Pope inspired and continues):

     "The Pope is himself temperamentally more interested in the
question of Reunion with the Eastern Churches and with conversions
in the mission field. He had hoped during his Papacy to arrange
such a Reunion with the Orthodox Churches so that the growth of
democratic Catholicism in the New World would be counterbalanced"
(P. 3).

     It is not a question of the temperament of any Pope -- for
that matter Pius XII is far more aristocratic than Pius XI was --
but of the permanent policy of the Black International, and it is
misleading to place so much stress on the New World. Teeling points
out that the New World or America has come in the course of modern
developments to have 400 Catholic bishops against 650 in Europe and
says that the Vatican fears that this democratic New World may come
to have the majority. That is misleading because the great majority
of the 400 American bishops are in the Latin Republics -- there are
only 140 in the United States -- and they dread democracy and
loathe Socialism (its inevitable offspring in Vatican eyes) as much
as the Pope does. At the very time when Teeling wrote his book they
were cooperating with the secular authorities in a truculent
suppression of democracy in nearly every Republic of South and 
Central America, and we know how they loathe it in Mexico.

     Look at it this way. There are still about 280 bishops in Ital
and more than 150 in France, Spain, and Portugal, and they, like
the Spanish-American bishops, have cooperated in the complete
destruction of democracy in their countries. The Catholic bishops
of Germany and Belgium have done the same. But the Vatican has no
hope of seeing an anti-democratic attitude in the 320 archbishops
and bishops of the United States and (except Quebec) the British 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               29

                 THE POPE AND THE ITALIAN JACKAL

Empire, for it would ruin the prospects of the Church in those
countries if they let it be known that it is anti-democratic. They
must even toll the grotesque lie -- since the Church obviously
supports Fascism in every country where it has power -- that the
Pope loves democracy and Catholic principles are in perfect harmony
with it; What the Church loves is the gold of democracy -- of
America and Britain -- but he and the miserable brood of Italian
bishops who fatten on it fear that, as they must continue to create
new bishops and cardinal's in these profitable, but poisonous
(democratic) sections of the Church the Italian monopoly of power
and wealth is in danger and the essentially authoritarian teaching
of the Church is menaced. For a time they saw the danger increase
as the Church in France, Germany, and Italy had to meet the needs
of the new age by starting Christian Socialist or Catholic
Democratic movements, as I have elsewhere described. That danger is
happily (from the Papal viewpoint) removed by the truculent
establishment of Fascism, but the future is uncertain. Hence the
need of a counter-balance by bringing in the Greek and other
eastern Churches with their innumerable bishops and archbishops.

     In this the Vatican betrays once more how false is that
reputation for psychology and "insight" which its propagandists
have won for it. It is building upon a theory of the psychology of
the Slav and of the oriental which has long been discredited. It
was common in the last century to say, and it is still far too
often said by literary men, that the Slav and the oriental mind is
docile, passive, and naturally submissive to authority. Not only
does the modern science of psychology reject these old superficial
theories of racial psychology but recent developments in Russia,
China, and India ought to have taught every man how nonsensical
they are. It is just as absurd to credit the Vatican with broad
outlook and penetrating insight. These Italian parasites are a
bunch of Chinese mandarins who are an anachronism in the modern
world.

     It, at all events, explains the coincidence of the policy of
the Vatican with that of the Italian jackal. The Pope refuses to
condemn he rape of Abyssinia -- a monstrous moral outrage -- though
British and American Catholics clamor for a condemnation, and, at
the very time when Cardinal Hinsley assures them that he heard the
Pope call it a "barbarous outrage", the Pope bestows the Golden
Rose on the Queen of Italy as Empress of Abyssinia. He get's his
"unauthorized" agents to say how he was disturbed by Mussolini
forcing the gates to the East (Albania) and does not say a word
about Yugo-Slavia and Greece, but his whole Italian hierarchy
boosts the campaign, and his priests and nuns follow in the wake of
the barbarized soldiers. He is following the whole Drive to the
East with the liveliest hope and expectation. He is not a Man of
Blood like Mussolini or Hitler. In the time-honored fashion of the
Roman Church he gets "the secular arm" to shed the blood for him.

                          ****     ****


    Reproducible Electronic Publishing can defeat censorship.


                          ****     ****

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               30




                        31 page printout

    Reproducible Electronic Publishing can defeat censorship.

          This file, its printout, or copies of either
          are to be copied and given away, but NOT sold.

          Bank of Wisdom, Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                          ****     ****

Edited by E. Haldeman-Julius

THE BLACK INTERNATIONAL                 No. 9

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

       HOW THE WISKED BOLSHEVIKS SAVE OUR CHRISTIAN WORLD

                        by Joseph McCabe

                  HALDEMAN-JULIUS PUBLICATIONS
                     GIRARD  -- : --  KANSAS
                          ****     ****

   CHAPTER
     I    The Vatican Courts Russia for years ................. 1

    II    The Supposed Persecutuin of Religion ................ 8

   III    The Papal Hymn of Hate ............................. 14

    IV    Hitler's Magnifient Blunder ........................ 19

                          ****     ****

                            Chapter I

               THE VATICAN COURTS RUSSIA FOR YEARS

     On the very morning on which I begin to write this little book
the news comes that Japan has attacked America. It completes my
case against the Vatican. Its third big friend and ally joins the
struggle to destroy all freedom, all enlightenment, all that we
most deeply prize in what we call our civilization. The Papacy has
still other friends, it is true. It has Vichy France and Franco
Spain, those islands of Fascism amidst populations in chains which
loathe them. It has Salazar Portugal, Leopold of Belgium, the
miserable new Slovakia and Montenegro, and the rats of Eire,
Hungary, and Rumania. One hopes it is proud of them. Until today it
flattered itself that amongst its loyal friends it numbered nearly
all the Republics of South and Central America but this latest
outrage on all human decency by one of the big Papal Allies seems
to have shaken most of them. The powerful friends of the Vatican
are Germany, Italy, and Japan -- the most brutalized powers of
modern history, the enemies of the human race.

     It is not nine months since the Pope gave Matsuoka so gracious
an interview at the Vatican that the wily Jap called it "the most
beautiful moment of my life" and he put amongst his treasures the
gold medal which the Pope gave him. Matsuoka had done more than any
other representative of Japan to fool Americans and delay their 

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               1

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

armament. He is a more unctuous liar than Ribbentrop. Last March,
when he was so affectionately received by the Pope, he had just
come from interviews with Hitler and Mussolini, in which beyond
question the date, if not the manner, of Japan's intervention must
have been discussed. There is here no room for one of those
"unauthorized" assurances that the Pope was saddened or depressed
or murmured about barbarous outrages. From the audience he went,
radiant, to his usual public audience -- ten to fifty dollars a
head -- and said, according to the Osservatore (his own organ) as
well as the Italian and German journalists who were present, that
he had had "a fine conversation" with Matsuoka. And the
unscrupulous Japs went home to join in the concerting of the plot
to dupe America to the last moment and fall upon it with all the
brutal cunning and treachery which have characterized the greedy
enterprises of the Pope's two other big friends.

     Why call the Pope Japan's ally and friend, your Catholic
neighbor may ask, I had better recall for you what I said briefly
on the subject in the second book of this series. When in the most
fateful hour of this catastrophic development, the rape of
Manchuria, the first trial of strength of barbarism against
civilization, Japan looked round a hostile world for a friend it
found only the Vatican. The new Secretary of State, the present
Pope, directed French priests in the East to cooperate with the
bandits. I should not think that any decent American Catholic will
ask you to believe that the Papacy was merely concerned about the
spiritual welfare of the few thousand (or hundred) miserable rice-
converts to the Church in Manchuria. Anyhow, it was the beginning
of a most edifying friendship. Although there were only 100,000
Catholics in Japan there was soon talk of an exchange of
ambassadors between Tokyo and the Vatican City, and just when Japan
exposed its own lies about Manchuria by seizing and corrupting
other provinces of China the Vatican proudly announced, and the
Catholic press everywhere joyously repeated, that that proof of
amity between two "civilizations" had been achieved. Since then, as
I quoted in the words of a French Catholic, no Japanese of any
standing visited Europe without calling to pay his respects to "the
Holy Father."

     By what name will this beastly war be known in the history-
books of the future? We hope that our great-grandchildren will read
of it with amazement in their High Schools as "The Last Great War."
If the men and women of the rising generation who have shuddered at
its horrors do not make a life-vow of critical vigilance, if they
again trust priests and politicians to prevent the world from
drifting into so shameful a surrender to banditry, they are
unworthy of the years of sunlight which the chances of life have
offered them.

     Some think that the title will be "The Most Amazing War in
History." From 1919 onward hundreds of writers thrilled us with
gruesome pictures of the super-brutalities of the next war, and for
the last ten years at least there cannot have been a doubt in any
man's mind which nations were expected to rain down fire and poison
upon peaceful cities and which peoples were to suffer. Yet the
aggressive nations openly flaunted their programs of conquest and
their plainly named victims went from jazz to swing and let even 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               2

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

the weapons of 1918 rot in the fields. When the time came little
England declared war with an equipment of 18 good planes, quarter
of a million cardboard-coffins, and 40,000,000 gas-masks. France
entrusted its fate to naval and military commanders who allow
priests to tell them that an appalling national calamity purifies
the soul of a people and that no price is too high to pay for the
destruction of Communism and Atheism. Then there was the long spell
of "cockeyed war" in which profiteers waxed fat. Then, most amazing
of all, the great power that every other nation in the world had
maligned and every Church cursed entered the arena in which we were
supposed to be fighting for Christian civilization and lit it at
last with valor and heroism.

     Some day historians and military experts will estimate more
coldly than we can and more boldly than we dare today what chance
the British Empire, even with what we might call the morganatic
alliance of America, had of escaping destruction after the
appalling betrayal of civilization by France. There will be at
least many who will conclude that if Hitler had at that time
persevered in his designs against Russia before turning to attack
Yugo-Slavia, Greece, and Russia, the issue would have been. . . .
Let me, since I am an Englishman, leave it at that.

     But the most amazing feature of all is the story of the
relations of the Vatican with the Soviet civilization. In all that
maelstrom of emotion that agitated the press and peoples of the
world when mighty Russia entered the war nothing was more
intriguing than the wavering and discordant note of the Catholic
press. Even when it was clear, as it must have been to every
informed person, that the world's peril was mightily relieved, if
not dissipated, by the accession of this new strength to the forces
of good, large numbers of Catholics in every country denounced the
idea of employing it, and a certain reserve or hesitation was found
throughout the entire Church. You know why. Every Church had
attacked Russia for its Atheism and its supposed persecution of
religion, but the others had been temperate in comparison with the
Church of Rome. Ten years ago it had borrowed and adopted the motto
which Voltaire had coined against itself, "Wipe out the Infamous
Thing." We had been reading in Catholic writers for decades that
the truculence of that slogan was proof of the essential vulgarity
of the irreligious soul, and suddenly, five or six years ago, the
gentle voice of Mother Church began its "Wipe out Bolshevism in
Russia, Spain, and Mexico." Even a Catholic writer does not pretend
that Voltaire urged men to extinguish the Roman Church in blood.
But that is the only possible meaning of the Pope's slogan. He
appealed to "governments." The German hierarchy appealed to Hitler
to let them add their prayers to the thunder of his guns. The
American hierarchy appealed to Wall Street, which is believed to
have some influence at Washington.

     All that is known, but what is your Catholic friend likely to
say if you tell him that in what his own (as well as general)
literature calls the very worst years of Bolshevik power, the years
when priests like Father Walsh, who spent two years in Russia, tell
him that bishops and priests were murdered by the hundreds and with
sadistic savagery, the Vatican was straining every nerve to court
the favor of Lenin and his colleagues? That in the first year of 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               3

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

Bolshevik power, the summer of 1918, Russian Catholics held, for
the first time in the history of Russia, the most solemn and august
of their public processions, with the consecrated host, in the
streets of Leningrad, and no one was allowed to molest them?

     That is really the most amazing feature of the story of the
Vatican and Russia. As long as the Bolsheviks were Bolsheviks --
that is to say, as long as Lenin attempted to run the country on
Communist lines -- and a savage White War and famine did profoundly
disturb the normal Socialist psychology -- the Papacy was the only
power in the world that repeatedly attempted to enter into cordial
relations with them. But when the New Economic Policy suspended
Communism in Russia, when the passions of the civil war had died
down and the stately structure of a new and higher civilization
began to rise from its foundations, the Pope began to denounce
Bolshevism as the spawn of the devil and call for a crusade to wipe
it out in blood!

     Yet the evidence for that can be taken entirely from Catholic
sources, and any man who has read my account -- fully supported by
the Catholic Teeling -- of the Papal ambition to take over the
eastern Churches, will be prepared to accept it. To many, however,
it will seem not merely one of those "libels" of which Catholics
are taught to complain so pathetically, but a quite impossible
suggestion. So let us take this attempt of the Vatican to court the
Soviet government during the four or five years when all the rest
of the world hated it as our first point.

     From the Catholic Teeling (The Pope in Politics), who is no
rebel against his Church, I quoted the statement that the Vatican
was most eager to capture the Greek and other eastern Churches in
order to counterbalance the growth of democratic elements (chiefly
American and British) in the Latin Church. He goes on to describe
how the destruction of the power of the Greek or Orthodox Church in
Russia by the Bolsheviks -- in fact, the knowledge that they would
very soon achieve this -- gave the Papacy a wonderful new outlook
for its anti-democratic ambition. By flattering the Bolshevik
leaders and thanking them for delivering Russian Pacifists from the
tyranny of the Orthodox Church it hoped to take the place of the
discredited heads of the old national Church.

     The somewhat sympathetic American writer George Seldes (The
Vatican) says the same, with a slight difference. He says that the
Vatican regarded the rise of the Bolsheviks to power with mixed
feelings: a loathing of their economic philosophy and rejoicing --
for which he quotes the Osservatore in the splendid opportunity of
the Church, Seldes states on the title-page of his book that the
historical part of it is taken from a work by two French Catholics,
G. London and C. Pichon (Le Vatican et le monde moderns, 1933). He
does not explain how 20 small pages of historical matter in the
French book have become more than 100 large pages in his own book.
Anyhow, he here retouches their text. They simply say that the
Papacy rejoiced in the Russian Revolution in so far as it opened
out a golden prospect to itself. The talk about the infamy of the
Bolshevik philosophy began later. At the time doubtless Rome had
just the same idea of Bolshevism but it was prepared to sup with
the devil.


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               4

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

     Another Catholic writer who candidly describes this early
phase is Miss M.A. Almedingen (The Catholic Church in Russia Today,
1923). Her little book is valuable not only because the author is
one of those ardent (in the pious sense) virgins who are the
treasure of the clergy but because she lived in Russia during these
years of courtship. She tells us that the Bolsheviks at once
released the head of the Roman Church whom the Tsarists had put in
prison -- a Pole who had been guilty of political intrigue, be it
noted -- and lifted all the restrictions which the Tsarists had
laid upon Papist activities. It is this same devout Catholic and
very truthful lady who tells us that in the summer of 1918
Catholics were allowed to hold, for the first time in Russian
history, their sacred Corpus Christi procession, a priest openly
carrying what they call the Blessed Sacrament, in the streets of
Petrograd and at least one other city. The Bolsheviks actually
favored the Roman against the Greek Catholics, and there was, this
ideal witness assures us, no interference whatever with their
religion until the summer of 1919, nearly two years after Lenin got
power, and no "persecution" until three years after that. In 1920,
she says, Rome was still so intent upon friendship with the Soviet
authorities that bodies of friars waited on the frontiers for the
signal to march in and win the Russian people for the Vatican.

     I have earlier explained the situation. The Russian Orthodox
Church was the largest of the sections into which political
developments in the 19th Century had split the old Greek Church. It
differed from the Roman in ritual and on one very abstruse point of
doctrine (the procession of the Holy Ghost) but most emphatically
in rejecting the Pope's pretensions. That it was, and had always
been, very corrupt is agreed. "The Orthodox Church was filthy with
corruption and debauchery," says Seldes (p. 287). The 10,000 monks
were "very lax," says the Catholic Encyclopedia. But most people
have read the very characteristic story of St. Rasputin. Any body
who carers to look up a copy of The Romance of the Romanoffs which
I wrote and published in New York in 1917 will find many piquant
pages on church-life. Peter the Great had so open a contempt for it
that in the drunken debauches he held with his court he and the men
often dressed as monks and his loosest women dressed as nuns.
Catherine the Great had hardly less contempt for it. We recognize
in every age a decent and religious minority in it but it remained
until 1917 so generally corrupt that most educated Russians
despised it.

     The Bolsheviks had another reason to attack it besides the
spectacle of so corrupt a body owning "fabulous wealth," as the
most neutral historians say, and exploiting the ignorant. From the
time of the French Revolution it had drawn closer to the autocracy,
knowing that they would stand or fall together. Every atrocity of
the statesmen and their hirelings who protected the throne of the
Tsars was blessed by the Holy Synod, and this continued in the 19th
Century. In the last great revolutionary period, 1904-5, the jails
of Russia, which were supposed to have a capacity of 107,000, were
crammed with 174,000 prisoners, besides 100,000 in the Siberian
colonies. These prisoners were to a very large extent young men and
women of the university-student class. Thousands -- after boldly
stitching tabs with their names on their clothes. -- went out on
the streets to be shot. Hundreds committed suicide or were carried 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               5

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

off by epidemics in the fetid jail's every month. Brutal jailers
raped the refined young women in their cells. The press abroad put
these horrors in small paragraphs, if they were mentioned at all.
The banner-headlines were reserved for the fictitious "Bolshevik
atrocities" of a later date. But you will not be surprised that a
great debt was inscribed in the memory of the Socialists.

     Yet Lenin and his colleagues were content, as long as the
clergy kept out of polities, to disestablish the Church, destroy
its monopoly, and confiscate the bulk of its superfluous wealth.
Beyond that, Miss Armedinger insists, there was no persecution for
four or five years, and the complete freedom, and equality of
cults, which the Orthodox hierarchy had refused, were warmly
welcomed by the Romanists. The Vatican, however, which had from
long experience a cynical distrust of argumentative proselytism and
a decided preference for the knout, wanted more than freedom. The
Orthodox Church had been richer than any section of the Roman
Church, which in Russia was exceptionally poor. A very impartial
note on the religious situation in Kiesing's Contemporary Archives
(October 18, 1941, p. 4848) says that the monks and higher clergy
of the Orthodox Church had a wealth in land alone of
$8,500,000,000, and the property, jewels, etc. of their churches
and monasteries represented a vast further sum. The Vatican's dream
of taking over this was soon dissipated, as the Bolsheviks more
sensibly transferred it to the people of Russia. But it was said,
since the census of 1913, that the Orthodox Church had 98,000,000
communicants, and doubtless, since the only difference in doctrine
was one that not one Russian in 100,000 could comprehend, a little
pressure from the Soviet authorities Would help these millions
(mostly illiterate) to see that the Pope was a far holier person
than the Orthodox patriarch.

     The Bolsheviks had other designs but for a year or two they
were not unwilling to see Roman Catholicism, of which they knew
very little, replace the Catholicism which they had so much ground
to hate. Meantime, however, the White War, in which passions flamed
to redness and even conservative writers admit that the Imperialist
Russians themselves committed appalling atrocities had broken out.
How this led to what is called persecution we shall see in the next
chapter, but it is worth noting that we have here a parallel with
the French Revolution of a very different kind from that which is
usually, and falsely, pressed upon us. Aulard and other leading
French historians have shown that Danton and Robespierre, instead
of trying to destroy religion, made every effort to maintain the
Church but the people overruled them. In much the same way Miss
Almedinger, then living in Russia, describes Lenin and his
colleagues following a policy of religious freedom and the people
impatient of it. The Red guards, she says, frowned on the public
Catholic processions of 1918 but did not interfere. In the
following year they began to disturb services in the churches and
were checked by the authorities, but these did not seriously
interfere with religion until 1922, when large numbers of churches
were closed and priests arrested.

     We shall see why. For the moment let us follow the wooing of
the Kremlin by the Vatican. In 1922 the Romanists in Russia, who
were now reduced to one or two millions, mostly Poles and 
Lithuanians, by the formation of the independent republic of 

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               6

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

Poland, suffered like the Orthodox for having intrigued with the
invading Poles and White Russians, and the golden prospect that had
opened up in 1917 to the eyes of the Papacy was replaced by a fear
that its Church was doomed to total destruction in Russia. The
Genoa Conference in 1922, at which the European powers were to meet
and come to a friendly agreement with representatives of Russia,
the higher interests of trade and the recovery of debts having
overruled the world's repugnance to Atheist Russia, gave the
Vatican a new hope. The Archbishop of Genoa was instructed to get
in touch with and cultivate Comrade Chicherin.

     London and Pichon, whose account is followed by Seldes and
Teeling, tell the story. After several futile attempts to meet
Chicherin the archbishop got himself placed next to the Russian at
a banquet which the king of Italy gave to the delegates and he was
as amiable as an Italian prelate knows how to be. He came away with
Chicherin's autograph on his menu, exchanging it for his own. Bear
in mind that according to later Catholic literature these
Bolsheviks had already slaughtered a thousand bishops and heaven
knows how many thousand priests. Doubtless the archbishop sent a
roseate account of his success to Rome, but Chicherin was not so
simple as the prelate imagined. Russia, disgusted at the
hypocritical patronage and greed of the powers, made a separate
trade-agreement with Germany, and the conference ended in
confusion.

     The Vatican still wooed the hated Russians. some men compare
it to a blond gold-digger pursuing a wealthy gangster but we will
confine ourselves strictly to the facts, as told by Catholic
writers. The agents of the Vatican transferred their solicitation
to the Russian representative in Rome. The civil war had been
followed by a famine in which millions died, and the Pope pressed
for permission to help in the work of relief in which many nations
cooperated. Even Catholic writers do not go so far as to ask us to
admire the generosity of the Vatican in helping the nation which
had, it was alleged all over the world, been guilty of an atrocious
massacre of priests. The aim was so clearly propaganda that the
Russians exacted an agreement that the members of the Vatican
relief mission should avoid politics and propaganda before they
were allowed to enter the country.

     Everyone knows the value of these Catholic promises to refrain
from propaganda; when, for instance, you send your children to a
nun's school or an invalid to a Catholic hospital or convalescent
home. A priest or nun is bound in conscience to get round that
promise. So the American Jesuit Father Walsh, the head of the
Vatican mission, set out with a million nice parcels "for the
children of Russia from the Pope of Rome." So Seldes says, but he
does not add, as London and Pichon do, that they took also colored
photographs of the Pope to stick in their relief-centers; and you
can imagine for yourself what answers the Jesuits gave when
Russians made inquiries about this picturesque and benevolent
gentleman. The Russians found that they were proselytizing and in
1924 conducted them to the frontier. Walsh went back to America and
published one of the vilest of the attacks on Russia which were now
beginning to gladden the heart of Wall Street. He swept together
the wildest and most incredible stories of Bolshevik savagery; and 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               7

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

you will find it interesting to remember that these things are
supposed to have been perpetrated before or during the two years
when the Jesuit was working in Russia in friendly relationship with
the Soviet authorities.

     Still the Vatican hoped. It chose a French Jesuit, Father
D'Herbigny, whom it turned into a bishop to make him more
acceptable to the simple Soviet authorities, He and a few others
got into Russia and were expelled for intrigue, and the long
courtship, which was now clearly hopeless, ended in a Hymn of Hate.
D'Herbigny joined the libellers and maybe regarded as the author of
the Papal bugle-call for "the extinction of Bolshevism." It is
convenient for Catholics to forget that the Vatican pressed its
friendship on Russia during these years when the appalling
condition of the country did give rise to a great deal of violence
and all the rest of the world was hostile. But the facts I have
given are quoted entirely from Catholic sources, and we must not
allow them to be concealed. What the Papacy believed about the
character of the power with which it sought an alliance did not
matter to it. All that it regarded was, as it thought, a new chance
of attaining wealth and power. As soon as that chance was
definitely lost and Communism and Atheism spread from Russia and
threatened the Church's wealth and power in other countries it
turned against Russia and tried to excite a war against It. The
fact that Russia was now building up a peaceful and humane
civilization did not matter to it. Indeed, the clearer Russia's
peaceful and humane intentions became and the greater its success
the more savage the language of the Vatican became. Did I overstate
the truth when I said that the first aim of the Black International
is the protection and increase, by hook or crook, of its own wealth
and power? 


                           Chapter II

              THE SUPPOSED PERSECUTION OF RELIGION

     When Mr. Roosevelt recently sent Harriman to Moscow to inquire
what help Russia required he told his envoy to raise the question
of freedom of religion. That fact was stated in many papers and is
duly recorded in the Keesing daily summary of the press. Nothing
but heavy pressure from the Churches could have induced so broad-
minded a statesman as Mr. Roosevelt thus to interfere in the
internal affairs of another nation and, by implication, lay down
conditions on which he would grant help to a power that was bearing
the whole brunt of the attack on civilization; and back of this.
pressure of the Churches is, notoriously, the charge that Russia
persecutes religion or puts penalties of some sort on those who
practice it.

     Most of us know the insincerity of that charge. Russia was
feared and hated, until it entered the war because its rapid
progress from about 1928 to 1940 discredited two very sacred
principles of the British and American press, literature, and 





                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               8

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

politicians. One, the ancient and threadbare charge against
Socialism, the really fundamental reason why Russia was treated as
an outlaw nation and the truth about it concealed, was the
assertion that you cannot make progress without private enterprise
or, in the ordinary meaning of the word, capitalism. It would not
do to let the people of the world know that Socialist Russia was
advancing so rapidly that this most emphatic principle of
individualism was completely discredited.

     The second principle was that you cannot even maintain an
existing civilization without religion; and, since in this respect
we are thinking of the ruling or, guiding class of a nation, the
principle refers particularly to these. Yet, whatever be the
strength of religion in Russia today, which we will discuss later,
no one questions or could question that the members of the
administration from the Commissars at Moscow to the administrative
officials of a small town are all Atheists. These Atheists have
achieved in twenty years one of the greatest feats in history in
the construction of a civilization. They took over, not a working
and fairly solid economy as they Fascists and the Nazis did, but a
country that had been reduced to a state of social and cultural
chaos, Tsarist Russia had been low in culture and character and,
for so large a country with such resources, far from rich. But the
three years of the European War, the ensuing two years of the White
and the Polish War, and the two years subsequently of famine and
disease, had made a wilderness of the vast land. Anyone who does
not realize that ought to look into a good annual, like the Annual
Register, for 1923 and 1924. It was still a few years before the
Communist statesmen could begin serious construction, and I repeat
that what they did between 1928 and 1940 is beyond all historical
precedents. All the world knows it today.

     Hence when American writers so far removed from Communism as
John Dewey, Durant, etc. began to assert this fact the anti-
Socialist slogan was discredited and criticism, to be plausible,
had to be confined to the supposed interference with religion. Here
again priests and bankers joined hands, and the most unscrupulous
priests of all were the Roman Catholic. Although, particularly in
Britain, the charge of persecuting religion was, as we shall see,
officially disproved years ago, we must admit that the Church of
Rome was not the only offender. The entry of Russia into the war
roused the same ecclesiastical fussiness in England as in, America,
to which Mr. Roosevelt's unhappy instruction to Harriman bears
witness. The President of the Baptist World Alliance publicly
denied Maisky's claim that religion is, and has been for years,
free in Russia. To that we will return but we, at once, recognize
one distinction between Protestant and Catholic anti-Communism. The
Protestant Churches wanted such diplomatic pressure as their
government could bring to bear upon Moscow, but as I have quoted
repeatedly in the Pope's own words, the Vatican wanted Communism
extinguished by war.

     Some of my readers may occasionally regard my language about
that Church, which is treated with profound respect in most papers,
as over-emphatic, but candidly, could any man with moderate
historical knowledge characterize in milder terms the effrontery of
the Vatican's diatribes against Russia? Hell hath no fury like a 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               9

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

Pope's scorn, of course, but most people do not expect the strident
and unreasoning language of a rejected suitor from the heads of any
Church, and for the Popes to complain of persecution is simply
grotesque. Ever since Europe returned to some degree of mental
sanity in the 20th Century the Popes have relied on savage
persecution to maintain their power and of the half-million
democrats who forfeited their lives for freedom in the 19th Century
all but a few hundred were victims of Catholic authorities, lay and
clerical acting together.

     But there is no need to go into history. In our own day, we
have seen repeatedly in this series of books, Rome follows the old
policy of persecution wherever it can. We saw that the Catholic
Church and authorities of Poland maintained a brutal persecution of
the Orthodox Catholics in the Galician Ukraine, indeed of
Protestants in Poland itself, from 1919 to 1939. We saw that when
Pacelli had traversed South America the most terrible persecution,
including torture, broke out everywhere. It followed the seizure of
power from the Socialists by the Catholics of Vienna. . . . In
short, the policy has been enforced wherever the Vatican had the
power to enforce right down to the time, only a few months ago,
when the priests of Croatia and Bulgaria fell upon the priests of
the Serb Church.

     The supreme irony is that, as I have shown until most of my
readers must be tired. of it, in its Canon Law today the Church
lays down that it "can and must put heretics to death." Catholics
in Britain and America are so keen to prevent this from becoming
generally known that it astonishes most people. Only two days ago
I had a letter from a businessman asking where he could buy a copy
of this Canon Law as, if that is impossible -- as it is, for the
Vatican Press alone publishes it, and only for priests -- whether
I could get for him a photostat of the page -- there are five or
six pages -- making the claim! I have not found any priest bold
enough to deny it in writing for the non-Catholic public. The
modern world rightly laughs at the idea of Roman priests burning
heretics, or forcing the police to burn them, in the market-place,
but there is here a serious question of principle. The great
majority of people in every advanced modern civilization claim
freedom to go to church or stay away, to accept a religious creed
or reject them all. Why do we tolerate all this fuss about "freedom
of religion" from Catholic writers and priests who say they will,
wherever they get the power, suppress all freedom of irreligion?
Clerical-Fascist power has in our own time fallen truculently upon
tens of millions of seceders from the Church in Italy, Spain,
Portugal, France, and Latin America, and none are more vehement
than these countries in demanding the blood of the Bolsheviks
because they put certain mild restriction's on the propaganda, not
the personal practice, of religion!

     There is another forgotten aspect which will interest every
man who wants honesty even in religious propaganda. I said that one
of the first things the Bolsheviks did was to release the head of
the Catholic Church in Russia from the jail to which "Holy Russia"
of Tsarist days had sent him. This was only a last trace of a
bitter persecution of Roman Catholics that the Orthodox Russians
had maintained for a century. Catholics now generally suppress the 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               10

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

facts -- though you may read some account of them in the Catholic
Encyclopedia, since it was written before 1920 -- in order to be
able to represent the "persecution of religion" as a wicked
practice introduced into Russia by those terrible Bolsheviks.

     In point of fact, such restrictions as the Bolshevik
authorities have really laid upon religion, apart from the legal
punishment of priests for treason, are trifles in comparison with
what the Greek Catholics did to the Latin Catholics in the last
century. You will find it amusing to read in the article on Russia
in the Catholic Encyclopedia how 70 or 80 years ago Pope Pius IX
was using about his brothers in Christ of the Orthodox Church
exactly the same abusive language as the Vatican now uses about the
Bolsheviks! But what was then done out of religious hatred -- we
must admit that the chief ground was that the Russian Catholics
were then, as now, mostly Poles and political intriguers -- was far
worse than Catholic's have suffered in Soviet Russia. Hundreds of
priests were hanged and whole communities of nuns were raped and
brutally treated. They were stripped and flogged and in some cases
burned alive. Young Catholic nuns were put in Orthodox convents,
and it was hell. One Orthodox mother-superior took an axe to one of
these stubborn Romanist nuns. At one place a number of nuns were
put in sacks, and dragged over the surface of lakes in winter, the
people cheering from the banks. Monks had to let down their pants
and sit on the ice. I really wonder why Father Walsh did not get
hold of some of these true stories of 80 years ago and turn them
into Bolshevik outrages of 1923 and 1924!

     These, things make a mockery of all this modern twaddle about
cruel Atheists and sadistic Bolsheviks. And when we examine the
stories which are offered us even by writers who pose as experts we
find them often grotesque. There is, for instance, a much-consulted
history of the early Bolshevik years by Lancelot Lawton (The
Russian Revolution, 1927). Most people know only that he was a
correspondent in Russia of the Liberal Daily Chronicle and not that
-- so a Russian official assured me -- he married a White Russian.
Most of the folk who talk about the horrors of the early years
would quote Lawton. Well, here is a specimen of his "history." He
says, "The number of ecclesiastical persons executed from 1917 to
1920 was 8,050, including 1,275 bishops." How magnanimous of the
Vatican to press its friendship upon Russia after such a ghastly
slaughter! But if you put together the details given in the
Catholic Encyclopedia and its supplement and the last edition of
the Encyclopedia Britannica you will be relieved to find that in
1917 there were not more than 80 archbishops and bishops, of both
Churches, in Russia, and most of them escaped -- the Encyclopedia
Britannica describes 15 of them setting up a synod in Belgrade --
or went to prison for intrigue with the invaders. It is a nice
example of the "historical" basis for the talk about Bolshevik
atrocities and persecution of religion.

     As far as the Roman Catholics are concerned we may follow Miss
Almedinger because she not only lived in Russia at the time but she
is so really religious that she won't lie even in the good cause.
She tells us that one Catholic bishop and a number of anonymous
Catholics were put to death and admits that they were guilty in
Russian law. Bolshevik law was so wicked that it imposed sentence 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               11

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

of death on traitors or men who intrigued with and helped the
invaders. One of the most impartial histories of the time, J.H.
Jackson's Post-War World (1935, p. 189) says that "no case has been
discovered of a priest or anyone else being punished for the
practice of religion." Those words, we shall see presently, are
part of the official report of the British ambassador and were read
in the British House of Commons by the Foreign Secretary (a vary
religious man). The charge has been so discredited that it does not
appear in the supplement of the Catholic Encyclopedia which was
published after the alleged period of sanguinary persecution, but
other Catholic writers sustain throughout the world the tattered
legend of Bolshevik atrocities. It is the chief foundation for
their gospel of hatred of Russia and their demand (until recently)
that other powers should make war upon it.

     The period in question is still as obscure as some parts of
ancient history, for the confusion was such that few authentic
records were kept while the intense passion on both sides gave rise
to vast quantities of reckless rumors. There is again a real
analogy with the French Revolution -- with the true story of the
revolution for, as I said, Lenin and Stalin no more interfered with
religion for the first few years, beyond disestablishing the
corrupt Orthodox Church and nationalizing its superfluous wealth,
than the leaders of the French Revolution had done. And in both
cases it was hostile invasion and the intrigues of the clergy with
the invaders which soured the people and forced the hand of the
authorities. After the November Revolution Lenin repudiated the
huge foreign debt incurred by the Tsarists, and foreign armies were
sent to help the Whites or refugee imperialists. About 300,000
Whites, Poles, Rumanians, Czechs, Japanese, British, American and
French entered the distressed and impoverished country for the
purpose of destroying the new regime, and there never was a more
savage war. As in the French Revolution, again, the refugees told
wild stories (as is now definitely proved by French histories) of
the number of victims. The Russians say 50,000. Some unprejudiced
historians suggest between 100,000 and 200,000. But even so
responsible an organ as the London Times gave the figure as
7,700,000 with just such impossible exaggerations in detail as that
I quoted from Lawton.

     The Poles continued this war when the other Allies quit, and
at a time when the country suffered as no other land has done in
modern times, and it would be absurd to doubt that the Catholic
clergy and the peasants they controlled did all they could to help
them. At one time it looked as if the Poles were likely to win and
restore the autocracy of the Church. In any case the vast majority
of the Roman Catholics left in Russia after the detachment of
provinces to form Poland, Latvia, and Lithuania, were Poles. How
many there were no one knows. They were too poor for the Church to
organize them. The Catholic Encyclopedia claims 5,000,000 and then
talks of dioceses in which there was only one priest to 5,000 or
even 10,000 Catholics! There were probably not a million subjects
of the Pope then in Russia, and the number today is negligible. It
was the heritage of the Orthodox Church for which the Vatican was
fighting.




                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               12

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

     The Orthodox clergy and the few Romanist priests continued to
intrigue with Poland and the White refugees abroad, and there were
further executions. Any fair-minded man ought to recognize the real
character of these after the official verdict given in the British
House of Commons. In 1929 some of the religious members of
Parliament, under Church pressure, shamelessly ignoring the rule
that one country does not interfere in the internal affair's of
another, insisted that the government should inquire into the
persecution of religion in Russia. This, it will be remembered, was
the year in which the Papacy signed its Concordat with Mussolini,
and desperate efforts were made to get Mussolini to forbid the
practice of any religion but the Roman in Italy. Severe
restrictions were, in fact, put on Protestantism, and the grossest
intolerance to seceders from the Church was embodied in the law,
with the approval of those Catholics in all countries who continued
to talk about Russian persecution of religion. The oracle of
American Catholicism, Msgr. Ryan, blandly explained it on the
principle that truth has rights but error none!

     However, the British government asked its ambassador in
Moscow, Sir Esmond Ovey, for a report, and it contained this
sentence which was read to the House of Commons by the Foreign
Secretary, the pious Henderson -- the government was then under
that arch-trimmer Ramsay Macdonald, who was at one time a personal
friend of mine and a complete Agnostic -- on April 23 and reported
in the press next day:

     "There is no religious persecution in Russia, in the strict
sense of the word persecution, and no case has been discovered of
a priest or anyone else being punished for practicing religion."

     It is characteristic of the way in which the public is
educated by its press in our time, under pressure of Roman
Catholicism, that a persecution of the Ukrainians by the Poles on
the ground of religion (as well as nationality) was then at its
height and only three papers in Britain and America dared refer to
it. At the most Russia restricted religious folk to their own
premises while in Poland priests opposed to Rome were flogged,
grossly insulted, robbed and jailed. But did you hear any outcry
about the persecution of religion in Poland or any demand that
American or British authorities ought to make an inquiry?

     To this official assurance that no priest or anyone had been
"punished for practicing religion" could be added the words of a
large number of religious leaders, in Russia itself. In a booklet
published in America (The Soviet War on Religion, 1930) Mr.
Sherwood gives, with exact reference to the date of publication in
the Russian press, a number of these admissions. One is signed by
three archbishops of the Orthodox Church (p. 27), one by 31 Jewish
rabbis, (p. 28), one by a group of Roman Catholic priests, and so
on. They insist that there is no persecution, say that the stories
of atrocities are "inventions and slanders unworthy of serious
peoples attention" and that there is no question even of "pressure"
on them, and that there had been general political intrigue on the
part of the clergy, especially of the Roman Church. The Catholic
priests, admitting this, actually say:



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               13

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

     "The dark era of oppression has disappeared without a trace,
together with the Tsardom which maintained it, and the star of
liberty has begun to shine with its bright radiance on the life of
the Catholic Church" (p. 29).

     This was in 1927 and refutes the strongest claims of
atrocities, which are located before that date. Yet the Vatican not
merely encouraged the circulation of those stories in the Catholic
Church but actually became more vitriolic in its indictment of
Russia after that date; just at the time when its pets (Spain,
Portugal, the South American Republics, Italy and Austria) were
beginning to enforce a policy of persecution of religion.

     Putting aside therefore all stories of execution or outrage on
the ground of religion, which are thus disproved by the best
authorities, what is the law or practice in regard to religion
which, though it ought to be well known at Washington, moves Mr.
Roosevelt to raise the question of freedom of religion in such form
as to suggest that there is none, or only a restricted liberty, in
Russia? The prominence given in the press to the President's
instruction to Mr. Harriman led Keesing's Contemporary Archives to
insert at that date (October 18, 1941, p. 4848) one of its
impartial explanatory notes. It speaks of the "corruption" and
"fabulous wealth" of the Tsarist Orthodox Church and says that the
action taken against its clergy after the Revolution was taken on
the ground of "their secular activities rather than religious
partisanship." Whatever the ground no one who knows anything about
the old Church will feel surprise that in June 1918 the Church was
disestablished, the ecclesiastical property (nearly $4,000,000,000
worth of land) nationalized, religious education excluded from the
schools, and missionary activities suppressed. Within these limits
every Russian was free to follow his conscience. This was the
extent of persecution of religion in the years of the first violent
reaction against the foul older era.

     It is complained that the Soviet authorities then gave all the
unofficial assistance they could to the Atheist League which was
rapidly weaning the people from religion. It is rather funny to
read this complaint in countries in which the political authorities
do everything in their power to help the Churches; and the Soviet
authorities were more deeply and sincerely convinced that religion
is prejudicial to progress than democratic statesmen are that it is
beneficial, to say nothing of the treasonable activities of the
Russian clergy. It is complained also that, as time went on a large
number of seminaries, monasteries, and churches were closed. In
hundreds of instances the churches were converted to more useful
purposes at the request of the people who used to frequent them,
and political intrigue sufficiently excuses the closing of
seminaries and monasteries. The writer of the note in Keesing
quaintly says that "in spite of all this" the Orthodox Church
counted 98,000,000 communicants and the Roman Church 11,000,000
members, but "the last census," to which he appeals was taken in
1913!

     We will try presently to ascertain how many folk in Russia
still belong to the Churches and will continue here to examine this
supposedly neutral account. As Russia entered into relations with 
other countries the zeal against religion was modified. In 1935 the

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               14

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

attempt to suppress the celebration of Christmas was dropped, the
more violent literature of the Atheist League was withdrawn from
the bookstores, and the famous anti-Christian museums, with their
caricatures of religion, became respectable museum's of religion!
In 1939 there was, this writer says, a great religious revival,
though "not within the framework of the Churches." How Christian
writers love vague phrases like that. In plain English the Churches
continued to lose, but there were now large numbers of priests who
fought to modernize theology, even to combine Communism with a "new
Christianity," and there was a good deal of fresh discussion of
religion. At the outbreak of the war with Germany the government --
the Christian Science Monitor announced -- suppressed the Atheist
paper (Bezboznik).

     In other words, the increasing danger from Germany induced the
authorities to take various steps which might mitigate the hatred
of Russia which the Churches inspired in America and Britain, but
the law was not altered, and Mr. Roosevelt seems to have been
persuaded that it contained an element of persecution of religion.
Senator Smith bluntly put it: "Harriman's job seems to be to try to
get Stalin to join the Church so we can call him brother." We all
understood what it really meant. The representatives of Churches at
Washington thought it a good opportunity to get Russian law made
more favorable to religion. What is wrong with the law?

     As Maisky, speaking to the American Chamber of Commerce in
London on September 23, and Lozovsky in Moscow said, its
fundamental principle is that all religions are free and equal;
which we were always asked to regard as one of the finest
achievements of the American Constitution. Let me repeat, as so few
seem to realize it, that you will not find that just law and
elementary human right conceded in any Roman Catholic country in
the world today. Even in Eire and Quebec there is no religious
equality, and the more docile to the Vatican Catholic states are,
the more of its Canon Law they admit into their legislation, the
more intolerant they are. Persecution of religion -- any religion
that rejects the Pope's authority -- is, we have seen, a first
principle of Catholic law and theology. And, though we moderns
insist that the non-religious man has the same right to liberty as
the members of any Church, the intolerance is in this respect worse
than ever. The Vatican's first excuse for its demand of the
extinction of Bolshevism is that the Russians are Atheists.

     Maisky later added to his statement of Russian law. The
government, which owns all property, puts a building at the
disposal of any group of worshipers and charges no rent or taxes.
Certainly a queer kind of persecution of religion! The police
arrest and the courts punish any who "violate the rights of
believers." Ministers of all religions have just the Same Political
and legal rights as other citizens.

     To this the President of the Baptist World Alliance made a
heated reply, and we may take it that his letter enumerates every
respect in which he and his colleagues see the shadow of
persecution. Worshipers, he says, must confine their worship to a
church. Sunday Schools and religious lesions to children are
forbidden. The Churches must have no social gatherings, no 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               15

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

lectures, and no libraries. Mr. Rushbrooke might be advised to
compare these restrictions on priests with the restrictions on
Protestant Churches and Atheists in Catholic lands; and if he
replies that Protestants do not do these things the answer is
simple. They certainly did in England until, in the 19th Century,
the Church of England, which inspired the law. dropped to a
minority. We might even raise a question about Baptist tolerance in
certain states of America, but it is enough to reflect that
Baptists or Methodists were never yet the majority in any country
so we must not be too sure what they would or would not do if they
had the power.

     To sum up the contents of this chapter and give the reader a
clear idea on an issue that often confronts him in his reading,
there is no truth in the stories that Catholics, Orthodox or Roman,
were ever physically persecuted in Russia, that is to say, ever
sent to, jail, much less executed, for belonging to a Church or
practicing religion. An unknown number of bishops and priests,
which in certain cases we have definitely proved to be exaggerated
fifteen-fold, were put to death in the dark early years, but the
ground was political, and our religious authorities admit that the
clergy did quite generally conspire with attempts to subvert the
government. We do not blame them when they saw a chance of the
restoration of the Church to wealth and power, but it is silly to
call this persecution. The law of treason is much the same in every
country, and Russia was in such circumstances at the time that a
drastic application of the law was essential.

     As to later years and the present time we frankly admit that
the Churches are not free to do what they like in Russia. The
restrictions are mild in comparison with the restrictions on
religion imposed in Catholic countries, and we very justly resent
the practice of calling them persecution and implying that they are
something peculiar to Soviet Russia. That is implied in the great
majority of reference's to religion in Russia, and not a word of
appreciation is given the Bolsheviks for their introduction of the
principle of individual freedom of conscience. The restrictions are
that the priests must not impose religious doctrines on children,
who can't argue with their teachers, or do propaganda other than by
holding religious services which any person may attend.

     Apart from those whose admiration of Russia is so great that
we might regard their judgment as biased, Atheists would differ
about the propriety of these restrictions. We must, however, at
least not judge the Russian authorities in the light of our
experience in America. The Russian Church, which alone we need
consider since the Roman brand of Catholicism is nearly dead, has
been an enemy of the people for a thousand years. It allowed the
Tsars and the nobles to keep nearly half a million peasants until
100 years ago in the state of slavery (serfdom) which Europe
generally abolished 700 years ago. It supported a corrupt and
murderous autocracy until 1917. It continued for the next 10 years
to help every attempt to destroy a regime in which, whatever else
you may think of it, the wealth produced by the people is shared
amongst the people. To me personally it seems that if the Soviet
authorities still think it dangerous, they have the right to impose
these mild restrictions. Please yourself. They do not care the toss


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               16

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

of a coin what you and I think about it. But as a vast amount of
evil has been done by the Churches, and most particularly the
Vatican, spreading a hatred of Russia, I have had to show that
there is no justification for this in any persecution of religion.

                           Chapter III

                     THE PAPAL HYMN OF HATE

     I invite the readers' particular attention to the
chronological parallel between the successive phases of the
Vatican's attitude to Russia and the developments in that country.
I have briefly referred to it but it deserves careful
consideration. Until about 1925, when Jesuit Bishop D'Herbigny was
still trying to get a foothold in Russia, the Vatican made friendly
approaches to the Soviet government. Apart from the futile gesture
of the Genoa Conference no other power in the world was so amiable
with Russia, and the country itself was in a very miserable
condition. Long after that year our papers and novelists, were
still serving up pictures of Russians in rags clinging to
ramshackle overcrowded cars, sadistic officials of the 0.G.P.U. who
had innocent maids waiting in the ante-rooms until they had
finished their champagne-orgies, priests boiled in oil or burned in
lime, and go on.

     During the next ten years the world-hostility to Russia
moderated. There was always money for a fiery indictment of the
Soviet system, but level-headed men began to see that Russia had
got on to a line on which it might travel far. During this
indecisive period the Vatican had not much to say about Russia as
far as I can ascertain. Locally members of the Black International
like the American Jesuit Walsh might inflame sentiment against
Russia. Business and financial men were not really very sensitive
about outrages of religion. They were more deeply pained by the
refusal of the Soviet authorities to pay interest on the Tsarist
loans and on British and American investments. But if there were a
few million folk who believed Walsh's stories and helped to swell
the feeling against Russia, it was all to the good. Still the
Papacy, as I said, was fairly quiet about Russia. In fact, as lite
as 1930 the Pope politely summoned the Catholic world, not to
agitate for war but to pray fervently for Russia, the consequences
of which I cannot discover.

     About 1934 what we might broadly call the third phase of
Russia's internal development and relation to other power's began.
Russia had after so many years of bovine prejudice become rather
indifferent to the opinion of the outside world but it received a
large number of visitors from America and Britain every year, and
men and women of very different schools and respected character
wrote in high appreciation of its recovery. So neutral an authority
as the Statesmen's Year Book showed that Russia more than doubled
its annual production of wealth from 1932 to 1935 -- a feat far
beyond the achievement of any other country -- and there were no
rich men to absorb any of it. Duranty has written sympathetic
accounts for years to the New York Times, and his volume of
articles (Russia Reported, 1934) made a deep impression. In the
same year Sherwood Eddy's Russia Today, written from a different 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               17

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

rather conservative angle, confirmed the impression. A lady of the
Tsarist family who had settled in America, Countess Skaryatina,
still very conservative and religious, had the courage to go to
Russia and the honesty to say that the Bolsheviks had made great
progress (First to Go Back, 1935). An equally conservative British
general, W.H. Waters, also a lover of the old regime, paid a visit
and made the same report. Sir Bernard Pares, high British authority
on the East and for years a heavy critic of Bolsheviks, now gave a
very appreciative account and joined the "Friends of Russia." He
spoke of a "hostile foreign diplomat" in Moscow who grudgingly
admitted to him that "the Bolsheviks have won all along the line."
We shall see other equally notable impartial witnesses later.

     Naturally, the literature about Russia was very mixed. Some
writers expressly catered to the chronic demand for blood-curdling
stories of the O.G.P.U. and the poor folk who wept when their icons
were torn away from them. Others, with milder prejudice, denounced
Russia because it had no political elections of the democratic
purity of those of America or because the workers, who a few years
ago had been the worst paid and most ignorant in Europe, had not
yet risen to the high standard of American workers -- not
mentioning that there was no unemployment in Russia and the workers
had vast free social services and cheap rents in the cities.
Typical was the work of Sir W. Citrine, who went with all the
prejudice which the British Labor Party still stupidly fostered and
poked into tenements to see if the baths all had stoppers, and
after traveling hundreds of miles found a woman who seemed no
better than she ought to be and something like a slum (such as he
could have found within a mile of his house in London).

     However, my point here is that as appreciation of Russia grew
in the rest of the world the attitude of the Vatican to it became
more somber and bitter, Catholic apologists are nothing if not bold
but I have not yet heard of one who has asked us to admire the Pope
because he was friendly to Russia when the rest of the world was
venomous and became critical only when, and in proportion as, it no
longer needed friends. We might get near the truth if we remember
that the power behind the Pope, the Secretary of State, was changed
in 1930. Pacelli, the present Pope, an aristocrat to his toenails,
then became the dictator at the Vatican, for the Pope was very old
and feeble. We might remember, too, that Pacelli entered, at the
end of 1932, into a policy of friendliness to Germans, and Germany
was pledged by its, bible, Hitler's book, to make war sooner or
later on Russia.

     When precisely the Vatican began to snarl at Russia it is
difficult to determine. The Encyclical Quadrazesimo anno of May 15,
1931 makes the earliest reference that I find, and the hand of
Pacelli in that vapid manifesto is clear. It is a recommendation of
the Corporative State to all Catholic countries; in fact, to the
whole world, as the Pope ingenuously remarks that the truth on even
the social and economic order can come only from Rome. How
journalists ever stoop to praise these Papal utterances on Social
questions puzzles me. They are like the ideas of a Baptist preacher
in Tennessee blinded with those of Thomas Aquinas and almost lost
in a jelly of Latin verbiage. There is, as I have already
explained, no English translation of this Encyclical, because it 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               18

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

approves -- indeed imposes -- such restrictions on capitalism and
private enterprise as are provided in Mussolini's Corporative
State, which industrialists in America who are assured by Catholic
writers that their "freedom of the individual is thoroughly
Catholic, detest almost as much as Socialism.

     The Pope tells the world, with quite an air of profundity and
originality, that Socialism has split into moderate Socialism and
Communism. As we saw, and it may be convenient to repeat, he
answers the question, on which, he says, Rome has often been
consulted, whether a Catholic can be a Socialist by saying that
"Socialism, as long as it remains real Socialism . . . cannot be
reconciled with the teaching of the Catholic Church." He insists
that "religious Socialism or Christian Socialism is a contradiction
in terms," and he winds up by saying that "no genuine Socialist can
be a good Catholic." That is another reason why the Encyclical is
not translated into English. It might prevent Catholic writers for
the workers from continuing to say, as they do, that the Church has
never condemned Socialism; while Catholic writer's for the wealthy,
like Ryan, tell them that the Church regards any attack on private
ownership as a sin.

     However, the Pope is still more drastic when he passes on to
Communism. It is too "impious" to consider. When it gets power it
shrinks from nothing "however atrocious and inhuman." As Russia was
the only country in which it had power this was pointed enough, but
the Pope goes on to speak of "the massacres (strange) and ruin it
has brought upon Eastern Europe and Asia." There may be earlier
pronouncements on Russian atrocities for all I know but this is ten
years old. A Jesuit writer quotes from the British Communist Daily
Worker an account of a meeting in the offices of that paper on
December 30, 1932 which passed a valiant resolution to attack
religion "considering that the clergy of all creeds and
denominations are, with religion as their pretext, following the
lead of the Pope in his call for a crusade against the U.S.S.R."
They resolved:

". . . to organize an unflinching resistance to every variety of
religious attack . . . to vindicate the policy of the U.S.S.R. in
regard to religion and the Churches against all and every attack .
. . to urge the complete separation of Church and State and the
complete exclusion of religion from the school," and so on.

     Communists must feel like biting the carpet when they reflect
how they abandoned that attitude. A few years later, when I was
writing my Militant Atheist -- perhaps the most congenial work I
ever did -- a member of the staff of the Daily Worker asked me to
call at the office, making a definite appointment, to see him as he
edited a column of the Dally Worker with that title and would like
to cooperate. I called -- and saw none but the editors who
explained that they had changed their policy and no longer thought
it of any importance to attack the Churches.

     It was a mistake even of Moscow to drop the criticism of
religion while adhering slavishly to everything else that Marx had
said. American and British Communists, on whom they relied for
information, told them that the bitter hostility to them would 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               19

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

cease if they quit criticizing religion. One or two influential
cleric's like the Dean of Canterbury had taken to patronizing
Russia, and publishers (skeptics) who felt that Rationalism checked
trade added their persuasion. In May 1938 the Communist
International published in England for America and Britain, had an
article which would, if there were any truth in superstition, have
made Marx turn in his grave. I am quoting the Jesuit Ryder at the
Cambridge Summer School of Russian Studies in 1938. The article,
headed "The Revolutionary Proletariat and the Catholic Masses,"
recommends the policy of conciliating Catholics and Protestants.
The Soviet Union, it claimed, was "realizing the ideals of
Christianity," and Communists must "not ignore the more than
400,000,000 Catholics of the world"; which is 50,000,000 more than
the more optimistic Catholics claim and double the true figure. The
writer poured scorn on "the Left phrasemongers" who attack the
policy of "the outstretched hand" and, by a tour de force, said
that "we come forward in the defense of religion against the
Fascist persecution of believers" yet had not the least idea of
deviating from the teaching of Marx! We recognize the accents of
the American and British Communists, who were at that time offering
cooperation to the Catholic Church. Now there is "a smile on the
face of the tiger." The blood of Communists reddens the earth in
Catholic Austria, Slovakia, Croatia, Spain, Portugal, Vichy France,
Italy, Brazil, Peru, etc. etc.

     In so far as Moscow was involved in this change of policy,
chiefly owing to false information from Britain and America, we
have an extraordinary situation. The change was carried out just at
the time when the Vatican was inflaming Catholic sentiment against
Russia all over the world and beginning to call for war upon
Russia; and the change brought about no modification whatever of
the world-cry of "persecution of religion in Russia." What moved
the papacy to enter upon this more bitter and more dangerous
campaign? I say more dangerous because it would be difficult to
exaggerate the profit to the Axis of this Papal preaching of hatred
of Russia in every Catholic land and amongst the Catholics of all
countries.

     The reasons given by the Vatican, as in the above Encyclical,
are puerile. In speaking of the "massacres" -- it is interesting
that in his Latin text Pacelli uses just the word which the Pope
put on his gold medal of triumph at the time of the St. Bartholomew
Massacre -- which the Bolsheviks committed he endorses the wild
legends and lies which I have disproved from Catholic writers. As
to their having brought "ruin" upon the land, the Pope, granting
him sincerity, seems to have been as crudely ignorant of Russian
affairs as a nun in a Quebec convent. By 1931 the Bolsheviks had
saved Russia from the real ruin which the White War (zealously
supported by the two Churches) had brought upon Russia and were
rapidly restoring prosperity and creating one of the finest
educational and social services in the world.

     His attacks in 1936 and his broadcasts to Spain in 1939 -- in
fact, all his characterizations of Bolshevism in his appeals for
war from 1935 onward -- are just as childish. I quoted elsewhere
the address of Pius XI to Spanish refugees in 1936, in, which he
plainly invited the destruction of Bolshevism "from Russia to
China, from Mexico to South America." The reference to South 

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               20

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

America is cool, as Pacelli, who clearly wrote the address, had
just got Communism violently destroyed in nearly every republic.
But the whole diatribe is fatuous. Everywhere, the Pope says, there
is "a satanic preparation" for the work of "subverting established
orders of every kind" and "attacking every institution, human and
divine." At that very time, philosophers like Professor Dewey,
Liberal individualists like Sir Ernest Simon (brother of Sir John
Simon), and a few clerics like the Dean of Canterbury were
describing to the public how Russia was creating a new social order
which in its care for children, women, and the mass of the people,
had no equal in history.

     We may make allowance for the real ignorance of Pacelli and
the Vatican. They never even try to get accurate information about
movements or bodies which are offensive to them on religious
grounds. They see everything through a red haze of professional
piety. But there is deliberate policy behind it all. By 1935 Japan
had got the innocent western powers to support Chiang Kai-shek in
his costly campaign to crush Communism in China and smooth the way
for Japan itself. Hitler and Mussolini were wondering how they
could get the same powers to overlook their proposed intervention
in Spain. Hitler was repeating in public speeches that the noble
German race must have the Ukraine. Wall Street wanted a good
pretext for stirring the country to attack Mexico. Labor and
Socialist movements everywhere were to be encouraged in their
tragic policy of attacking and disowning Communists so as to
prevent the formation of a Popular Front until it was too late.
This sacred fury against Bolshevism was one of the Vatican's
greatest contributions to the preparation of the world for the
onslaught of barbarism.

     But, you may ask, is it possible that the Pope, the Black
International which forced his slogan upon the Catholic masses
(which do not read encyclical's) in every country, and the Catholic
press which made "the extinction of Bolshevism" as familiar to
Catholics as "Heil Hitler" is to Germans and ... "Mussolini solo"
to Italians, realized what they were doing?

     You can analyze that for yourself. There is, of course, no
documentary evidence beyond the very plain evidence that the Papacy
blessed the rebellion and the intervention of Italy and Germany in
Spain and just as plainly wanted war on Russia. It must seem
equally certain to anyone who knows the ecclesiastical mind that
the Vatican and the Black International in America wanted war for
the annexation of Mexico. The Knights of Columbus, who may be
considered unconsecrated members of the Black International, made
open offers of alliance with Wall Street and called for
intervention in Mexico. Whether the Pope and the unscrupulous
Italian branch of the Black International knew in advance of the
war upon the western democracies we have considered in other
booklets. As I there said, so objective a review as the Annual
Record gives it as commonly received information, that Ribbentrop
told the Pope in April that the Germans would be in Paris in June
and in London in August. As to the main body of Catholics who
chanted the anti-Bolshevik slogan, they were probably as hazy about
what they meant as the average German is about the pure Aryan
sharing the world with a race of Mongolian-Malayan mongrels.


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               21

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

     One of the most ironic features of it all, if there is any
room for irony in considering the colossal tragedy, is that Russia,
the irreligion of which is blamed by the Vatican for all the
world's troubles, is more religious than Great Britain or than
France was before Vichy.

     The question how many of the people of Russia are still
religious has been raised innumerable times, and it has invariably
been answered with all the slovenliness and inconsistency that are
characteristic of such discussions. Generally the writers spoke of
"atheistic Russia" as if it were a phenomenally irreligious
country, but when they recollected that religion was supposed to be
indestructible or when the plain evidence (which we have seen) that
there is no persecution of religion and any few dozen men and women
can get a building from the government for worship was produced the
writers gave us pictures of crowds packing the churches on
festivals. As long as there was some dead cat to fling at Russia --
like the common misrepresentation of the trials, and executions of
leading Russians for treason -- we were reminded that the governing
body is solidly atheistic, and when some reputable author testified
that the social service is the most generous and most humane in the
world we were told Russia is still far more religious than is
commonly supposed.

     On one point there is no controversy. The officials, from
those in the smallest town to Stalin, are all Atheists. The
Communist party governs Russia -- hence the stupidity of calling
Stalin a dictator like Hitler and Mussolini -- and all its members
are Atheists. These officials determine the form and institutions
of the state. The mass of the people produce the wealth, of course,
and in that sense create the state, but these atheist officials
direct the distribution of it and are responsible for all social
legislation. They have given a form to the state which now elicits
the admiration of writers of every class. They have lifted the
average Russian character high above the level at which it was in
the religious Tsarist days, -- when atheism was confined to a
relatively small minority, with no influence on the state, in the
cities. This unquestionable truth is one of the chief reasons why
the clergy hate or fear it, and why the worst discredited libels of
it are still in circulation. Russia -- the creative part of Russia
-- has not merely disproved the common claim that a state decays
when atheism spreads. It has shown that the reality is the exact
opposite.

     The question what proportion of the mass of the people are
still Christians is, therefore, of no importance, but you will find
it amusing to assure your neighbor whose idea of Russia is taken
from the press that it is much more religious than Great Britain.
The Church of England a few year's ago appointed a committee to
inquire carefully how many people in England go to church or are in
any definite sense Christians. They reported, and the leaders of
other Churches agreed: 10 percent in London and 20 percent in the
rest of England. This -- a total of 8,000,000 or 9,000,000 in
42,000,000 -- fairly agrees with the statistic's of membership
annually published by the Churches, and these are always
optimistic. There is evidence that the Churches put the figure of
churchgoers too high but let us accept them here. Between three-


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               22

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

fourths and four-fifths of the people of Great Britain are not
Christians. It was the same in France, and Vichy has made only a
superficial compulsory change. In America the Churches claim 55
percent of the people, but we know what these claims are worth.
Allowing for the Bible Belt and the greater wealth and business
organizations of the Churches in America we should expect a higher
proportion of churchgoers: say, two-thirds of the total population.

     It follows that Russia is, on the best available estimates, as
religious as the United States and much more religious than Great
Britain or France! The best gauge is Yaroslavsky, the able and
accomplished leader of the Atheist League. He has several times
estimated that about one-third of the people in the Soviet Union
are still Christians. The Jesuit Ryder, speaking at the Cambridge
Summer School of Russian States, said, that this mean's 30,000,000
and is a ridiculous under-estimate. It is his jesuitical arithmetic
that is ridiculous. One-third of the population means nearly
60,000,000. But notice what follows. If you call Yaroslavsky's
estimate too small you must mean that more than a third are still
Christians, or a far higher proportion than in Great Britain and
France, and probably America. On any estimate Russia is more
religious than Great Britain. Now that it is smashing Germany the
clergy begin to say: We always thought so.

     Maisky, addressing the American Chamber of Commerce in London
on September 23, 1941, gave some figures which seem at first sight
to show that Yaroslavsky greatly over-estimated instead of under-
estimating the number of believer's. He quoted an official
statement that on June 1, 1941, there were 8,338 churches, mosques,
and synagogues in the Union, and 30,000 registered religious
societies (or, as we should say, parishes) of 20 or more person's.
But there must be here a serious misprint as to the number of
churches. Considering that there are about 10,000,000 Jews and
Romanists and 14,000,000 Moslem in the Soviet Union besides members
of the Orthodox Church the error is apparent. Great Britain has
more than 40,000 churches and chapels to less than 10,000,000
churchgoers. America has 200,000 religious organizations (organized
units or parishes) to less than 50,000,000 church-goers. If the
figure of 8,000 churches, mostly in villages, in Russia were
correct we should have to allow more than 7,000 worshipers to a
church to make even 60,000,000. As I have no access to the Soviet
official announcement (on August 15, 1941) I have to leave the
matter open, but we may reflect that if the figure of 30,000
parishes is correct it suggests less than 60,000,000 worshipers.

     We do better to follow the estimate of Yaroslavsky, who has no
interest in exaggerating the number of churchgoers, and we may
reflect that the change from the solid orthodoxy of the
overwhelming mass of the people less than thirty years ago means
that Atheism spread more rapidly between 1920 and 1940 than any
religion in history ever spread in 100 years; indeed forty or fifty
times as rapidly as Christianity spread in the first 250 years of
its career. We might also invite the attention of some of our
modern skeptics to the fact that it was mainly effected by pointing
out the absurdity of the current belief and the monstrous history
of the Orthodox Black International. Their is no religious revival
in recent years but there is evidence that suggests that the 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               23

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

extraordinarily rapid progress of Atheism has been slowed. This is
in part due to the fact that education has won nearly all but the
hard core of stubborn old folk -- though it is remarkable how
thousands of villages including nearly all their old folk quit the
Church and demanded that the chapel be converted into a library or
debating club -- and in part to the clergy of what calls itself the
New Church and turns the older Christian teaching inside out. It
is, however, clear that the discouragement by the government of the
methods of the Atheist League, which made a very extensive use of
ridicule and direct satirical attack, has retarded the spread of
Atheism.

     One would like to draw the attention of those very superior
Rationalists of our day who say that ridicule of religion "defeats
its own end" to this phenomenal success of such methods during 10
or 15 years. The Russian Atheists did not, of course, fail to
follow up their first direct assault on religious belief with solid
scientific and historical information. The cultural change in
Russia is not less remarkable than the economic. The gross general
ignorance and illiteracy of Tsarist Russia was many shades worse by
1923, after four years of war and famine. Yet by 1936 the country
had 164,081 schools besides 1,797 factory schools, 2,572 technical
schools, 716 workers colleges, 595 higher schools and universities,
and 794 institutions for scientific research. More than 10,000
newspapers and 2,100 magazines (700,000,000 copies) circulated. In
1935 the output of books was 42,700, and the 53,380 free libraries,
largely in villages, contained more than 100,000,000 books. Upon
this vast and finely selected literature the Atheist propagandist
drew, and he was welcomed in the 71,770 clubs (57,700 in the
villages) where the favorite entertainment was a serious debate. As
the government adheres to its law that religious doctrines shall
not be taught to children, who must be left to consider religion
when they have at least a moderate capacity to see through fallacy
and resent mere dogmatism, the young generation has for the far
greater part definitely abandoned religion. A very short account of
the cultural as well as economic development will be found in my
booklet Economic Gains of the Soviet Union (1937) in the A B C
Library of Living Knowledge.

     This is what the Pope calls destroying the very foundation's
of the social order: this is one line of the real program of
national life which our press until Russia became our ally
habitually coupled with the gross greed-programs of Germany, Italy,
and Japan as "the four totalitarian powers." Russia never received
and never sought to gain a single rouble by the labor of the people
outside its own Soviet Union, but there were few papers in the
world which, until we so urgently needed its help, did not class it
with the three powers which openly boasted they were going to
dominate and exploit most of the earth. Russia gave better
conditions to women (see Prof. Susan W. Kingsbury and Prof Mildred
Fairchild's Factory, Family, and Women in the Soviet Union, 1935)
than any other nation, while Germany and Italy, and the Pope's new
subjects states told woman to sacrifice all their hard-won rights
and confine themselves to cooking and bearing future soldiers.
Russia gave more sympathetic conditions to children (see Playtime
in Russia by Ethel Manning and others, 1935) than any other
country, allowing no distinction of class, giving all a two-month 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               24

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

vacation with entertainments or tours provided every summer, and
providing special theaters (three in Moscow) and parks (26 in
Moscow) for them; while Germany and Italy brutalized their lives
and minds with militarism. Russia encouraged the mass of the
workers to enjoy art as no other country did, while in Germany and
Italy art was starved and all culture debased.

     This was the civilization which the Pope taught the Catholics
of the world to curse and demand war against, and the more it shed
the imperfections due to its recent rise from chaos, the more it
won recognition for its splendid social ideals, the more bitterly
he attacked it, and the more stridently the Black International
broadcast his sentiments in every land. Is the complete collapse of
his Church in Russia enough to explain this? Is his failure to get
the billions of dollars and millions of members of the Orthodox
Church, the explanation? No, he hates Russia because it was showing
the world that you could not merely build a civilization without
priests but you could build a far finer, juster, more peaceful and
more humane civilization. He hate's Russia because from it there
spread, as far as China and Indo-China in the east and as far as
Peru and Chile in the west, that formidable Wave of Atheism which
I described in the second booklet of this series: because it was in
Roman Catholic countries particularly that it was effective since
Papal doctrine and history were as vulnerable as those of Orthodox
Russia.

     Some may say that a churchman, if his creed is sincere and
deeply felt, is bound to regard a spread of Atheism as a great evil
and may be understood even when he thinks war to prevent the spread
a lesser evil. There is no need for a profane person like myself to
discuss that question or to try to determine whether the Pope
really believes (as half the clergy do not) and deeply feels the
peculiar teaching of his Church about man and his destiny. We ask
a simple question: Why didn't he say so? Why need he give as the
pretext for his demand of war upon Russia every lie about Bolshevik
atrocities and persecution of religion that was current in
capitalist literature? Why did he assure the millions of ignorant
Catholics whom he wanted to inflame that the Bolsheviks were out to
destroy the moral and social order, to advocate cruelty and
violence, when it was easy for any man, to say nothing of a
billion-dollar international organization, to find out that Russia,
with its magnificent and complete resources, had no more reason for
war than the United States and was building a far finer social
order than that of the United States? And remember that we are not
here dealing with the Pope alone. We are considering the action of
a world-wide Black International that is saturated with skepticism
and hypocrisy and keener on dollars than harps.

     That is answer enough for most people but (we may go further.
We moderns -- by which I mean the majority of the men and women who
live in the cities of the world and have shed the limitations of
village-life -- will not have our affairs ruled or dictated by men,
however sincere they may be, who act on the myth that there is
another world that is far more important to men than this in which
we find ourselves. Whatever be the truth about religion this life
and the control of this life are secularized, We turn aside from
nothing fair and pleasant that it offers us because some of our 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               25

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

less-instructed neighbors think they see flames of hell reflected
from below the horizon or discern ghostly battlements of some weird
sort of heaven high above. And the clergy so far know this that
they plead that Atheism injures us in this life. We are always open
to argument but we resent lies. The clerical case for hatred of
Russia on human grounds is based upon a mass of demonstrable lies.
Its real basis is, as ever, the primary aim of the Black
International: wealth and power.



                           Chapter IV

                  HITLER'S MAGNIFICENT BLUNDER

     In September 1934 it was proposed to admit Soviet Russia to
the League of Nations. Nazi Germany, with Mein Kampf (the brigand's
guide) for its standard, had been retained in it. Japan had not
been expelled for its sordid violation of the League's principles.
Italy was an honored member although it made no secret of its
glorification of war and aggression. But the proposal to admit
Russia horrified and brought a shower of insults from the
representatives of various nations; and these outraged folk were
subjects of the Pope, and the Vatican warmly approved their
conduct.

     The attack on Russia was led by the Swiss Motta, a
representative of the nation that has always been loudest in praise
of peace -- which is very profitable at Geneva -- and is now making
much wealth by manufacturing the more delicate mechanisms of German
planes, tanks, and submarines and selling food to Germany while its
neighbors starve. At that time, perhaps, not even a member of the
middle-class that rules or misrules the Swiss would have made this
disgraceful attack on a progressive and peace-loving civilization
that could have taught Switzerland a higher idealism but Motta,
from the small Italian part of the country, was a zealous Catholic;
and that he acted for the Church is shown by the Vatican comment on
his vituperative speech in the Osservatore Romano (quoted with
approval in the British Catholic Universe, October 5, 1934):

     "Mr. Motta faced the problem of the admission of Russia with
a clarity of vision, a nobility of sentiment, and a rectitude of
Christian and civil conscience that finds a profound echo in the
hearts of all, for whom justice and right are still the unshakable
bases of civil society."

     Nobility of sentiment! The man was striking the first note of
that Hymn of Hate which the Vatican would soon urge upon Catholics
everywhere; the stupid chant that was to prevent, or help to
prevent, a cordial world-alliance against the bandits when the
crisis came, the chant that was pleasant music in the ears of
Hitler, Mussolini, and Matsuoka. The Vatican organ rejoiced that
ten states at Geneva opposed the admission of Russia or pointedly
abstained from voting for it, and we see Catholic influence in the
whole group. Holland voted against, and the press recorded that
this was due to Catholic influence in the cabinet. De Valera's
representative and Schuschnigg of Austria attacked Russia as 
virulently as Motta but did not vote.

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               26

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

     Two months before this Nazi Germany had shocked the world with
the mass-murder of prominent men, including Catholics, which is
called the Blood Purge. Did any Catholic orator or power, or the
Vatican, call it to account at the tribunal of civilization? Oh,
no; just then the Vatican was trying hard to persuade Hitler to
observe the Concordat and Catholic German bishops were flattering
him to his teeth. Two months after the Geneva meeting Japan,
probably encouraged by this outburst, threatened Russia, and there
was talk of war. What did Catholics say to that? Here is a
specimen, from the Catholic Times, November 3, 1934:

     "The Japanese are not anti-God. They have brought freedom from
persecution to our missionaries in Manchuria and adjacent parts of
China. They have consented to their settlers in Brazil being
instructed in the Catholic faith, and, while they dream of
influencing the world by the spread of Buddhism, they give freedom
of worship to their own Catholic nationals. In the event of a war
between Japan and Russia Catholics would sympathize with Japan, at
least in so far as religion is concerned, so let us beware of an
Anglo-American bloc against Japan involving us on the side of
Russia."

     There you have the pure Papal note, the accents of the Vatican
oracle Japan is "not anti-God" -- as a matter of fact, its ruling
class is almost as solidly Atheistic as the Russian -- while Russia
is, and Japan has made small concession's in the interest of the
Roman Church. So defend Japan and libel Russia in the Catholic
press of all lands. In that very year, 1934, Upton Close (J.W.
Hall) plainly exposed to America in his Challenge, with full
documentary evidence, that Japan was conquest-mad and had removed
the last shred of disguise from its greedy plan to monopolize
Eastern Asia and drive out all Christians, particularly Americans.
And because it hypocritically made promises to the Pope, Catholics
must be used as its agents in Britain and America to obscure the
mind of those countries in regard to its aims and divert them into
hatred of Russia.

     A few months later the same Catholic press went further in its
deadly work (Catholic Times, April, 1935):

     "Disarmament is dead . . . We can, nevertheless, have thirty
years' peace in Western Europe if France, Germany, Italy, and Great
Britain concentrate on Western Europe and its needs. We cannot have
agreement about Russia, since Germany has lifted the veil which
hides her ambitions. She wants the Ukraine. Few Catholics in this
country will approve a war against Russia, bad as her record is,
but fewer still will be happy if our alliances draw us into a war
in defense of the Godless. Russia must safeguard her own interests.
We are not concerned to uphold her. The wretched Franco-German
quarrel can be composed if France is willing to leave Russia to her
devices. If France insists on allying herself with the Soviet, she
should be told that Great Britain will have no part with her ... We
must choose between two evils, and Russia's possible loss of the
Ukraine is a much less evil than war-fires all over Europe, whilst
many would say that the undoing of Godless Sovietism is no evil at
all."



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               27

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

     As the British National Newspaper Library, the finest in
Europe, has been bombed and burned out of existence by the Germans,
I cannot verify the three quotations I have just given. I take them
from Miss E. Moore's No Friend of Democracy (1941) and I know the
author as a very careful and conscientious student of these
matters.

     This passage is a typical specimen of the slavery of the
Catholic press to the Vatican and its Policy of judging all
international events from the single viewpoint of the interest of
the Church while professing to consult the interest of the race.
The statement that few Catholic will approve of war against Russia
might seem to be written in defiance of the Pope's demand for a
crusade against that country, but the paper itself repeatedly
echoed the cry for "the extinction of Bolshevism," and the last
words of the above passage are plain enough. Not "many" but all
Catholics, as the writer knew, would rejoice at "the undoing of
Godless Sovietism." Notice, incidentally how carefully these
Catholic writers avoid the word Socialism. They know that large
numbers of Irish workers in Britain -- these workers of Irish birth
or descent are the main body of "English" Romanism -- belong to the
Labor Party, and this in rare moments of courage calls itself
Socialist.

     But the chief point is that this interpreter of Papal wishes
to the people of England emphatically advocates a national policy
which would be very acceptable to Hitler and was, in so far as it
was followed by Chamberlain and Halifax, most disastrous to Europe.
Russia was the one great European power that sincerely proposed
general disarmament. When its appeal was unheeded it was the one
power that began to devote a colossal part of its national
resources, which were very badly needed for social reconstruction
and education, to preparation for war. Thus in 1936, when British
statesmen were beginning to doubt the Baldwin policy of do-nothing,
Great Britain spent less than a fourth of its budget-revenue on
armaments and the United States one-tenth. But Soviet Russia set
aside one-fifth (20 billion out of 100 billion rubles) of its total
annual income -- for in that country the government-revenue
represents practically the whole of the wealth produced -- to
defense-measures, and it increased the sum every year until nearly
a third of the entire wealth produced in the country was devoted to
preparing for the barbarous and clearly-foreseen onslaught of
Nazism.

     What an ally Russia would have been from 1936 onward, and what
a different course of events in Europe might have followed! It must
be left to the historians of the future to say if a sincere and
dynamic alliance of Russia, Britain, France Czecho-Slovakia, and
Poland would not have intimidated Germany and Italy from that
piecemeal aggressive program upon which they entered. To me it
seems certain. But the Vatican and the Black International and the
Catholic press in every country did all in their power to prevent
it. Had the United States realized that Japan was one of the bandit
powers -- had the press freely and fully informed the people of the
open boast of Japanese politicians, military and naval men, and
editors, and told how highly colored models of the destruction of
the American fleet were exhibited to the public in Japanese cities 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               28

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

five or six years ago -- and joined the alliance, not in the
interest of Europe but its own interest, it probably never would
have known the vile treachery it has now experienced, for the
people themselves would have demanded adequate armament. But the
Vatican, the whole Roman Church, was opposed. There must be no
alliance with Bolshevism.

     Could there be a more terrible demonstration of the evil of
the sacerdotal viewpoint, the folly of listening to the Black
International on human affairs? At that time, 1936, the leading
powers were stirring from their criminal lethargy and beginning to
expand their armament-budgets. The League of Nations published a
statement that the world spent about $5,000,000,006 in that year on
armament, I have shown (What War and Militarism Cost) that it spent
something like $15,000,000,000, and one-third of this sum was,
according to the best experts, spent by Germany. What Japan and
Italy spent we do not know. No one trusts their figures. And the
two richest powers in the world, the two at which the great
conspiracy was chiefly aimed, America and Britain, spent (together)
one half the sum that Germany did. Russia alone spent something
like the sum that Germany did, though unlike Germany and Italy, it
did not starve or suppress its social services to find the money
but maintained and developed them.

     What guidance did the Papacy and its local agents give the
world? It bleated biennially about peace and between Christmas and
Easter cried for war on Communism in China, Spain, Mexico, and
Russia, above all Russia. It maintained its diplomatic alliance
with Germany, Italy, and Japan but spat poison whenever Russia was
mentioned. Its hierarchy flattered the ruler's of the three
aggressive, fully treacherous, and debauched bandit-states and told
the British and French people that they would have "thirty years
peace" if they would continue to outlaw Russia and trust Germany,
Italy, and Japan! What hilarious scenes there must have been behind
closed doors in Berlin, Rome, and Tokyo!

     Russia patiently, perhaps cynically, bore the hostility which
the Catholic Church and other interests fostered against it. It is
needless for me to observe that the Vatican was not the only
libellous enemy of Russia, but its share in the conspiracy is, on
account of its claim of lofty and disinterested idealism, in an
entirely different category from the share of bankers,
industrialists, and politicians. I am, however, not concerned with
finding adjectives to hurl at the Church of Rome. I am content to
establish facts. And if it is not a fact that Rome contributed
mightily until 1941 to that contempt and ostracism of Russia which
rendered vast service to the Axis and did incalculable harm to the
race we may as well doubt that the earth is a globe.

     So persistent and emphatic was this teaching of the Vatican,
especially during the fateful six or seven years before 1941, that
the Catholic world was paralyzed when at length Hitler made his
splendid blunder and attacked Russia. Less than a year earlier the
Papal Hymn of Hate had been more strident than ever. There were
many of us who, imperfectly informed by the press, felt our
admiration of Russia chilled when it seized part of Finland and the
little Baltic states. But we did not use the vituperative language 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               29

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

of the Pope's organ, the Osservatore Romano, the paper that had not
said a word about outrages like those in China, Abyssinia, Albania,
Czecho-Slovakia, Norway, Denmark, Yugo-Slavia, Greece, and, even
Belgium and France, for which even a liar could not plead, as we
now see Russia could truthfully plead, an essential piece of
defense against an openly-declared aggressor. The Vatican, in its
paper, not only completely ignored Russia's reasons but wallowed in
irony and invective as if this were the first aggression in modern
Europe.

     There is an amusing Paragraph in Stephen Graham's News Letter
(1940) reproducing the language of the Osservatore when the Russian
troops took back the Ukrainian and White Russian provinces. The
Papal organ shuddered to recall the atrocities committed by the
Russian troops in 1918. The soldiers were then Orthodox Catholics
almost to a man, and the Osservatore trembles to think what will
happen now that they are Atheists. And in the next paragraph
Stephen Graham, a strict member of the Church of England, gives
this report of an Englishman who Saw the Russian troops enter
Asthenia:

     "The fears proved to be groundless. The discipline is
extremely severe, and cases are known when soldiers were shot by
the political commissars for the slightest breach of discipline."

     The religious mind is weird and wonderful. Stephen Graham
actually goes on to reflect that this contrast of 1918 and 1940
suggests that "the atheist soldiers of 1918" were now extinct and
the Russians were generally Christians! Not for a moment do I
suggest that atheist soldiers never commit outrages, but what are
we to think of a Papal newspaper that sheds tears over the
fictitious outrage's of atheist soldiers -- I earlier quoted the
Vatican radio (January 22, 1940) bemoaning the "infamy of all
kinds" perpetrated by the Russian troops in Poland and has not a
word to say when we get positive Proof that the German soldiers
perpetrated real infamies and savagery in Russia?

     Here again it is not a question of the Pope or the Vatican
alone. The Black International everywhere repeated the cry of
Russian atrocities (made in Germany). In an address by Cardinal
Hinsely published recently in a work titled The Bond of Peace we
read of his "deep indignation" at "the enslavement of more than
eleven million inhabitants of the Polish state by Soviet Russia."
He talks of a "treacherous attack from behind" and the "Bolshevist
horror," and says that these "Poles," as he calls them, are
"reliably reported to be suffering from those persecutions which
had made our generation the era of unparalleled martyrdom." Perhaps
we should not expect a cardinal, even if he does pose as an oracle
on world-affairs, to know that Ukrainians and White Russians are
not Poles, but is he really ignorant that the "unparalleled
martyrdom" that these millions, of members of the Orthodox Church
suffered was inflicted by the Catholic Poles, had been going on for
20 years, and was at once stopped by the Russians?

     Now, as I have earlier quoted, there are signs of a most
brazen repudiation of the Hymn of Hate which the Papacy has had the
Catholic world chant from Montreal to Syria for the last six or 
seven years. Catholics boast that they are in a better position 

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               30

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

than Protestants in that they have one clear authoritative,
unwavering voice to guide them. It sounds like a dictatorship of
the Hitler sort. The truth is, however, that Rome speaks to them in
five or six different voices, and one can blandly repudiate the
other when it goes wrong. The only thing which they cannot
repudiate is the infallible or ex cathedra utterances of the Pope
-- but he never makes any. The Pope has several voices -- in
conversations, addresses, sermons, allocations, encyclicals, etc.
Then he has, in the second line a daily paper and a radio. In the
third line he has prelates and Catholic ambassadors, agents, etc.,
who can repeat conversations with him. On this third line we now
have Myron C. Taylor whispering that the Pope always recognized in
private a vast distinction between the naughtiness of the Nazis and
that of the Bolsheviks. Nazi wickedness is foul and unspeakable --
though he never cared to say so. Bolshevik wickedness is just
virtue without a Catholic foundation -- though he has a hundred
times called it foul and unspeakable.

     The latest audacity attributed to Mr. Taylor, solemnly cabled
to a London daily by its American correspondent, is this gem:

     "The general belief here is that important Washington-Vatican-
London-Moscow negotiations are in progress and that they are
directed towards the consolidation of the Christian front against
Nazism throughout the world."

     If we allow the Church of Rome to put over a maneuver of that
kind after its ten years of monstrous libel and vituperation of
Russia we have learned nothing by the terrible experience through
which we are passing. The Papacy could not hope to have any success
with it if it did not believe that we still have, unchanged, the
mentality with which we indolently contemplated the greediest and
most unscrupulous bandits of all time equipping themselves to loot
the world. There is no change in Russia. It is as atheistic as
ever. The change is in its critics. They have been compelled to
acknowledge that out of the horrible miseducated Tsarist Russia,
further demoralized by six years of war and two of terrible famine
and disease, the "Godless Bolsheviks," as the Catholic press still
called them only six month's ago, have created the greatest
civilization of our time; that the magnificent spirit of the
atheistic Russian people is in as stark a contrast as is
conceivable to the cowardice, evasiveness, tortuousness, and self-
seeking of the Black International that poisoned the world against
them.

                          ****     ****


    Reproducible Electronic Publishing can defeat censorship.

                          ****     ****

   The Bank of Wisdom is always looking for more of these old,
hidden, suppressed and forgotten books that contain needed facts
and information for today. If you have such books please contact
us, we need to give them back to America.

                          ****     ****

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               31





                        31 page printout

    Reproducible Electronic Publishing can defeat censorship.

          This file, its printout, or copies of either
          are to be copied and given away, but NOT sold.

          Bank of Wisdom, Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                          ****     ****

Edited by E. Haldeman-Julius

THE BLACK INTERNATIONAL                 No. 9

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

       HOW THE WISKED BOLSHEVIKS SAVE OUR CHRISTIAN WORLD

                        by Joseph McCabe

                  HALDEMAN-JULIUS PUBLICATIONS
                     GIRARD  -- : --  KANSAS
                          ****     ****

   CHAPTER
     I    The Vatican Courts Russia for years ................. 1

    II    The Supposed Persecutuin of Religion ................ 8

   III    The Papal Hymn of Hate ............................. 14

    IV    Hitler's Magnifient Blunder ........................ 19

                          ****     ****

                            Chapter I

               THE VATICAN COURTS RUSSIA FOR YEARS

     On the very morning on which I begin to write this little book
the news comes that Japan has attacked America. It completes my
case against the Vatican. Its third big friend and ally joins the
struggle to destroy all freedom, all enlightenment, all that we
most deeply prize in what we call our civilization. The Papacy has
still other friends, it is true. It has Vichy France and Franco
Spain, those islands of Fascism amidst populations in chains which
loathe them. It has Salazar Portugal, Leopold of Belgium, the
miserable new Slovakia and Montenegro, and the rats of Eire,
Hungary, and Rumania. One hopes it is proud of them. Until today it
flattered itself that amongst its loyal friends it numbered nearly
all the Republics of South and Central America but this latest
outrage on all human decency by one of the big Papal Allies seems
to have shaken most of them. The powerful friends of the Vatican
are Germany, Italy, and Japan -- the most brutalized powers of
modern history, the enemies of the human race.

     It is not nine months since the Pope gave Matsuoka so gracious
an interview at the Vatican that the wily Jap called it "the most
beautiful moment of my life" and he put amongst his treasures the
gold medal which the Pope gave him. Matsuoka had done more than any
other representative of Japan to fool Americans and delay their 

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               1

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

armament. He is a more unctuous liar than Ribbentrop. Last March,
when he was so affectionately received by the Pope, he had just
come from interviews with Hitler and Mussolini, in which beyond
question the date, if not the manner, of Japan's intervention must
have been discussed. There is here no room for one of those
"unauthorized" assurances that the Pope was saddened or depressed
or murmured about barbarous outrages. From the audience he went,
radiant, to his usual public audience -- ten to fifty dollars a
head -- and said, according to the Osservatore (his own organ) as
well as the Italian and German journalists who were present, that
he had had "a fine conversation" with Matsuoka. And the
unscrupulous Japs went home to join in the concerting of the plot
to dupe America to the last moment and fall upon it with all the
brutal cunning and treachery which have characterized the greedy
enterprises of the Pope's two other big friends.

     Why call the Pope Japan's ally and friend, your Catholic
neighbor may ask, I had better recall for you what I said briefly
on the subject in the second book of this series. When in the most
fateful hour of this catastrophic development, the rape of
Manchuria, the first trial of strength of barbarism against
civilization, Japan looked round a hostile world for a friend it
found only the Vatican. The new Secretary of State, the present
Pope, directed French priests in the East to cooperate with the
bandits. I should not think that any decent American Catholic will
ask you to believe that the Papacy was merely concerned about the
spiritual welfare of the few thousand (or hundred) miserable rice-
converts to the Church in Manchuria. Anyhow, it was the beginning
of a most edifying friendship. Although there were only 100,000
Catholics in Japan there was soon talk of an exchange of
ambassadors between Tokyo and the Vatican City, and just when Japan
exposed its own lies about Manchuria by seizing and corrupting
other provinces of China the Vatican proudly announced, and the
Catholic press everywhere joyously repeated, that that proof of
amity between two "civilizations" had been achieved. Since then, as
I quoted in the words of a French Catholic, no Japanese of any
standing visited Europe without calling to pay his respects to "the
Holy Father."

     By what name will this beastly war be known in the history-
books of the future? We hope that our great-grandchildren will read
of it with amazement in their High Schools as "The Last Great War."
If the men and women of the rising generation who have shuddered at
its horrors do not make a life-vow of critical vigilance, if they
again trust priests and politicians to prevent the world from
drifting into so shameful a surrender to banditry, they are
unworthy of the years of sunlight which the chances of life have
offered them.

     Some think that the title will be "The Most Amazing War in
History." From 1919 onward hundreds of writers thrilled us with
gruesome pictures of the super-brutalities of the next war, and for
the last ten years at least there cannot have been a doubt in any
man's mind which nations were expected to rain down fire and poison
upon peaceful cities and which peoples were to suffer. Yet the
aggressive nations openly flaunted their programs of conquest and
their plainly named victims went from jazz to swing and let even 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               2

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

the weapons of 1918 rot in the fields. When the time came little
England declared war with an equipment of 18 good planes, quarter
of a million cardboard-coffins, and 40,000,000 gas-masks. France
entrusted its fate to naval and military commanders who allow
priests to tell them that an appalling national calamity purifies
the soul of a people and that no price is too high to pay for the
destruction of Communism and Atheism. Then there was the long spell
of "cockeyed war" in which profiteers waxed fat. Then, most amazing
of all, the great power that every other nation in the world had
maligned and every Church cursed entered the arena in which we were
supposed to be fighting for Christian civilization and lit it at
last with valor and heroism.

     Some day historians and military experts will estimate more
coldly than we can and more boldly than we dare today what chance
the British Empire, even with what we might call the morganatic
alliance of America, had of escaping destruction after the
appalling betrayal of civilization by France. There will be at
least many who will conclude that if Hitler had at that time
persevered in his designs against Russia before turning to attack
Yugo-Slavia, Greece, and Russia, the issue would have been. . . .
Let me, since I am an Englishman, leave it at that.

     But the most amazing feature of all is the story of the
relations of the Vatican with the Soviet civilization. In all that
maelstrom of emotion that agitated the press and peoples of the
world when mighty Russia entered the war nothing was more
intriguing than the wavering and discordant note of the Catholic
press. Even when it was clear, as it must have been to every
informed person, that the world's peril was mightily relieved, if
not dissipated, by the accession of this new strength to the forces
of good, large numbers of Catholics in every country denounced the
idea of employing it, and a certain reserve or hesitation was found
throughout the entire Church. You know why. Every Church had
attacked Russia for its Atheism and its supposed persecution of
religion, but the others had been temperate in comparison with the
Church of Rome. Ten years ago it had borrowed and adopted the motto
which Voltaire had coined against itself, "Wipe out the Infamous
Thing." We had been reading in Catholic writers for decades that
the truculence of that slogan was proof of the essential vulgarity
of the irreligious soul, and suddenly, five or six years ago, the
gentle voice of Mother Church began its "Wipe out Bolshevism in
Russia, Spain, and Mexico." Even a Catholic writer does not pretend
that Voltaire urged men to extinguish the Roman Church in blood.
But that is the only possible meaning of the Pope's slogan. He
appealed to "governments." The German hierarchy appealed to Hitler
to let them add their prayers to the thunder of his guns. The
American hierarchy appealed to Wall Street, which is believed to
have some influence at Washington.

     All that is known, but what is your Catholic friend likely to
say if you tell him that in what his own (as well as general)
literature calls the very worst years of Bolshevik power, the years
when priests like Father Walsh, who spent two years in Russia, tell
him that bishops and priests were murdered by the hundreds and with
sadistic savagery, the Vatican was straining every nerve to court
the favor of Lenin and his colleagues? That in the first year of 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               3

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

Bolshevik power, the summer of 1918, Russian Catholics held, for
the first time in the history of Russia, the most solemn and august
of their public processions, with the consecrated host, in the
streets of Leningrad, and no one was allowed to molest them?

     That is really the most amazing feature of the story of the
Vatican and Russia. As long as the Bolsheviks were Bolsheviks --
that is to say, as long as Lenin attempted to run the country on
Communist lines -- and a savage White War and famine did profoundly
disturb the normal Socialist psychology -- the Papacy was the only
power in the world that repeatedly attempted to enter into cordial
relations with them. But when the New Economic Policy suspended
Communism in Russia, when the passions of the civil war had died
down and the stately structure of a new and higher civilization
began to rise from its foundations, the Pope began to denounce
Bolshevism as the spawn of the devil and call for a crusade to wipe
it out in blood!

     Yet the evidence for that can be taken entirely from Catholic
sources, and any man who has read my account -- fully supported by
the Catholic Teeling -- of the Papal ambition to take over the
eastern Churches, will be prepared to accept it. To many, however,
it will seem not merely one of those "libels" of which Catholics
are taught to complain so pathetically, but a quite impossible
suggestion. So let us take this attempt of the Vatican to court the
Soviet government during the four or five years when all the rest
of the world hated it as our first point.

     From the Catholic Teeling (The Pope in Politics), who is no
rebel against his Church, I quoted the statement that the Vatican
was most eager to capture the Greek and other eastern Churches in
order to counterbalance the growth of democratic elements (chiefly
American and British) in the Latin Church. He goes on to describe
how the destruction of the power of the Greek or Orthodox Church in
Russia by the Bolsheviks -- in fact, the knowledge that they would
very soon achieve this -- gave the Papacy a wonderful new outlook
for its anti-democratic ambition. By flattering the Bolshevik
leaders and thanking them for delivering Russian Pacifists from the
tyranny of the Orthodox Church it hoped to take the place of the
discredited heads of the old national Church.

     The somewhat sympathetic American writer George Seldes (The
Vatican) says the same, with a slight difference. He says that the
Vatican regarded the rise of the Bolsheviks to power with mixed
feelings: a loathing of their economic philosophy and rejoicing --
for which he quotes the Osservatore in the splendid opportunity of
the Church, Seldes states on the title-page of his book that the
historical part of it is taken from a work by two French Catholics,
G. London and C. Pichon (Le Vatican et le monde moderns, 1933). He
does not explain how 20 small pages of historical matter in the
French book have become more than 100 large pages in his own book.
Anyhow, he here retouches their text. They simply say that the
Papacy rejoiced in the Russian Revolution in so far as it opened
out a golden prospect to itself. The talk about the infamy of the
Bolshevik philosophy began later. At the time doubtless Rome had
just the same idea of Bolshevism but it was prepared to sup with
the devil.


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               4

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

     Another Catholic writer who candidly describes this early
phase is Miss M.A. Almedingen (The Catholic Church in Russia Today,
1923). Her little book is valuable not only because the author is
one of those ardent (in the pious sense) virgins who are the
treasure of the clergy but because she lived in Russia during these
years of courtship. She tells us that the Bolsheviks at once
released the head of the Roman Church whom the Tsarists had put in
prison -- a Pole who had been guilty of political intrigue, be it
noted -- and lifted all the restrictions which the Tsarists had
laid upon Papist activities. It is this same devout Catholic and
very truthful lady who tells us that in the summer of 1918
Catholics were allowed to hold, for the first time in Russian
history, their sacred Corpus Christi procession, a priest openly
carrying what they call the Blessed Sacrament, in the streets of
Petrograd and at least one other city. The Bolsheviks actually
favored the Roman against the Greek Catholics, and there was, this
ideal witness assures us, no interference whatever with their
religion until the summer of 1919, nearly two years after Lenin got
power, and no "persecution" until three years after that. In 1920,
she says, Rome was still so intent upon friendship with the Soviet
authorities that bodies of friars waited on the frontiers for the
signal to march in and win the Russian people for the Vatican.

     I have earlier explained the situation. The Russian Orthodox
Church was the largest of the sections into which political
developments in the 19th Century had split the old Greek Church. It
differed from the Roman in ritual and on one very abstruse point of
doctrine (the procession of the Holy Ghost) but most emphatically
in rejecting the Pope's pretensions. That it was, and had always
been, very corrupt is agreed. "The Orthodox Church was filthy with
corruption and debauchery," says Seldes (p. 287). The 10,000 monks
were "very lax," says the Catholic Encyclopedia. But most people
have read the very characteristic story of St. Rasputin. Any body
who carers to look up a copy of The Romance of the Romanoffs which
I wrote and published in New York in 1917 will find many piquant
pages on church-life. Peter the Great had so open a contempt for it
that in the drunken debauches he held with his court he and the men
often dressed as monks and his loosest women dressed as nuns.
Catherine the Great had hardly less contempt for it. We recognize
in every age a decent and religious minority in it but it remained
until 1917 so generally corrupt that most educated Russians
despised it.

     The Bolsheviks had another reason to attack it besides the
spectacle of so corrupt a body owning "fabulous wealth," as the
most neutral historians say, and exploiting the ignorant. From the
time of the French Revolution it had drawn closer to the autocracy,
knowing that they would stand or fall together. Every atrocity of
the statesmen and their hirelings who protected the throne of the
Tsars was blessed by the Holy Synod, and this continued in the 19th
Century. In the last great revolutionary period, 1904-5, the jails
of Russia, which were supposed to have a capacity of 107,000, were
crammed with 174,000 prisoners, besides 100,000 in the Siberian
colonies. These prisoners were to a very large extent young men and
women of the university-student class. Thousands -- after boldly
stitching tabs with their names on their clothes. -- went out on
the streets to be shot. Hundreds committed suicide or were carried 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               5

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

off by epidemics in the fetid jail's every month. Brutal jailers
raped the refined young women in their cells. The press abroad put
these horrors in small paragraphs, if they were mentioned at all.
The banner-headlines were reserved for the fictitious "Bolshevik
atrocities" of a later date. But you will not be surprised that a
great debt was inscribed in the memory of the Socialists.

     Yet Lenin and his colleagues were content, as long as the
clergy kept out of polities, to disestablish the Church, destroy
its monopoly, and confiscate the bulk of its superfluous wealth.
Beyond that, Miss Armedinger insists, there was no persecution for
four or five years, and the complete freedom, and equality of
cults, which the Orthodox hierarchy had refused, were warmly
welcomed by the Romanists. The Vatican, however, which had from
long experience a cynical distrust of argumentative proselytism and
a decided preference for the knout, wanted more than freedom. The
Orthodox Church had been richer than any section of the Roman
Church, which in Russia was exceptionally poor. A very impartial
note on the religious situation in Kiesing's Contemporary Archives
(October 18, 1941, p. 4848) says that the monks and higher clergy
of the Orthodox Church had a wealth in land alone of
$8,500,000,000, and the property, jewels, etc. of their churches
and monasteries represented a vast further sum. The Vatican's dream
of taking over this was soon dissipated, as the Bolsheviks more
sensibly transferred it to the people of Russia. But it was said,
since the census of 1913, that the Orthodox Church had 98,000,000
communicants, and doubtless, since the only difference in doctrine
was one that not one Russian in 100,000 could comprehend, a little
pressure from the Soviet authorities Would help these millions
(mostly illiterate) to see that the Pope was a far holier person
than the Orthodox patriarch.

     The Bolsheviks had other designs but for a year or two they
were not unwilling to see Roman Catholicism, of which they knew
very little, replace the Catholicism which they had so much ground
to hate. Meantime, however, the White War, in which passions flamed
to redness and even conservative writers admit that the Imperialist
Russians themselves committed appalling atrocities had broken out.
How this led to what is called persecution we shall see in the next
chapter, but it is worth noting that we have here a parallel with
the French Revolution of a very different kind from that which is
usually, and falsely, pressed upon us. Aulard and other leading
French historians have shown that Danton and Robespierre, instead
of trying to destroy religion, made every effort to maintain the
Church but the people overruled them. In much the same way Miss
Almedinger, then living in Russia, describes Lenin and his
colleagues following a policy of religious freedom and the people
impatient of it. The Red guards, she says, frowned on the public
Catholic processions of 1918 but did not interfere. In the
following year they began to disturb services in the churches and
were checked by the authorities, but these did not seriously
interfere with religion until 1922, when large numbers of churches
were closed and priests arrested.

     We shall see why. For the moment let us follow the wooing of
the Kremlin by the Vatican. In 1922 the Romanists in Russia, who
were now reduced to one or two millions, mostly Poles and 
Lithuanians, by the formation of the independent republic of 

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               6

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

Poland, suffered like the Orthodox for having intrigued with the
invading Poles and White Russians, and the golden prospect that had
opened up in 1917 to the eyes of the Papacy was replaced by a fear
that its Church was doomed to total destruction in Russia. The
Genoa Conference in 1922, at which the European powers were to meet
and come to a friendly agreement with representatives of Russia,
the higher interests of trade and the recovery of debts having
overruled the world's repugnance to Atheist Russia, gave the
Vatican a new hope. The Archbishop of Genoa was instructed to get
in touch with and cultivate Comrade Chicherin.

     London and Pichon, whose account is followed by Seldes and
Teeling, tell the story. After several futile attempts to meet
Chicherin the archbishop got himself placed next to the Russian at
a banquet which the king of Italy gave to the delegates and he was
as amiable as an Italian prelate knows how to be. He came away with
Chicherin's autograph on his menu, exchanging it for his own. Bear
in mind that according to later Catholic literature these
Bolsheviks had already slaughtered a thousand bishops and heaven
knows how many thousand priests. Doubtless the archbishop sent a
roseate account of his success to Rome, but Chicherin was not so
simple as the prelate imagined. Russia, disgusted at the
hypocritical patronage and greed of the powers, made a separate
trade-agreement with Germany, and the conference ended in
confusion.

     The Vatican still wooed the hated Russians. some men compare
it to a blond gold-digger pursuing a wealthy gangster but we will
confine ourselves strictly to the facts, as told by Catholic
writers. The agents of the Vatican transferred their solicitation
to the Russian representative in Rome. The civil war had been
followed by a famine in which millions died, and the Pope pressed
for permission to help in the work of relief in which many nations
cooperated. Even Catholic writers do not go so far as to ask us to
admire the generosity of the Vatican in helping the nation which
had, it was alleged all over the world, been guilty of an atrocious
massacre of priests. The aim was so clearly propaganda that the
Russians exacted an agreement that the members of the Vatican
relief mission should avoid politics and propaganda before they
were allowed to enter the country.

     Everyone knows the value of these Catholic promises to refrain
from propaganda; when, for instance, you send your children to a
nun's school or an invalid to a Catholic hospital or convalescent
home. A priest or nun is bound in conscience to get round that
promise. So the American Jesuit Father Walsh, the head of the
Vatican mission, set out with a million nice parcels "for the
children of Russia from the Pope of Rome." So Seldes says, but he
does not add, as London and Pichon do, that they took also colored
photographs of the Pope to stick in their relief-centers; and you
can imagine for yourself what answers the Jesuits gave when
Russians made inquiries about this picturesque and benevolent
gentleman. The Russians found that they were proselytizing and in
1924 conducted them to the frontier. Walsh went back to America and
published one of the vilest of the attacks on Russia which were now
beginning to gladden the heart of Wall Street. He swept together
the wildest and most incredible stories of Bolshevik savagery; and 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               7

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

you will find it interesting to remember that these things are
supposed to have been perpetrated before or during the two years
when the Jesuit was working in Russia in friendly relationship with
the Soviet authorities.

     Still the Vatican hoped. It chose a French Jesuit, Father
D'Herbigny, whom it turned into a bishop to make him more
acceptable to the simple Soviet authorities, He and a few others
got into Russia and were expelled for intrigue, and the long
courtship, which was now clearly hopeless, ended in a Hymn of Hate.
D'Herbigny joined the libellers and maybe regarded as the author of
the Papal bugle-call for "the extinction of Bolshevism." It is
convenient for Catholics to forget that the Vatican pressed its
friendship on Russia during these years when the appalling
condition of the country did give rise to a great deal of violence
and all the rest of the world was hostile. But the facts I have
given are quoted entirely from Catholic sources, and we must not
allow them to be concealed. What the Papacy believed about the
character of the power with which it sought an alliance did not
matter to it. All that it regarded was, as it thought, a new chance
of attaining wealth and power. As soon as that chance was
definitely lost and Communism and Atheism spread from Russia and
threatened the Church's wealth and power in other countries it
turned against Russia and tried to excite a war against It. The
fact that Russia was now building up a peaceful and humane
civilization did not matter to it. Indeed, the clearer Russia's
peaceful and humane intentions became and the greater its success
the more savage the language of the Vatican became. Did I overstate
the truth when I said that the first aim of the Black International
is the protection and increase, by hook or crook, of its own wealth
and power? 


                           Chapter II

              THE SUPPOSED PERSECUTION OF RELIGION

     When Mr. Roosevelt recently sent Harriman to Moscow to inquire
what help Russia required he told his envoy to raise the question
of freedom of religion. That fact was stated in many papers and is
duly recorded in the Keesing daily summary of the press. Nothing
but heavy pressure from the Churches could have induced so broad-
minded a statesman as Mr. Roosevelt thus to interfere in the
internal affairs of another nation and, by implication, lay down
conditions on which he would grant help to a power that was bearing
the whole brunt of the attack on civilization; and back of this.
pressure of the Churches is, notoriously, the charge that Russia
persecutes religion or puts penalties of some sort on those who
practice it.

     Most of us know the insincerity of that charge. Russia was
feared and hated, until it entered the war because its rapid
progress from about 1928 to 1940 discredited two very sacred
principles of the British and American press, literature, and 





                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               8

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

politicians. One, the ancient and threadbare charge against
Socialism, the really fundamental reason why Russia was treated as
an outlaw nation and the truth about it concealed, was the
assertion that you cannot make progress without private enterprise
or, in the ordinary meaning of the word, capitalism. It would not
do to let the people of the world know that Socialist Russia was
advancing so rapidly that this most emphatic principle of
individualism was completely discredited.

     The second principle was that you cannot even maintain an
existing civilization without religion; and, since in this respect
we are thinking of the ruling or, guiding class of a nation, the
principle refers particularly to these. Yet, whatever be the
strength of religion in Russia today, which we will discuss later,
no one questions or could question that the members of the
administration from the Commissars at Moscow to the administrative
officials of a small town are all Atheists. These Atheists have
achieved in twenty years one of the greatest feats in history in
the construction of a civilization. They took over, not a working
and fairly solid economy as they Fascists and the Nazis did, but a
country that had been reduced to a state of social and cultural
chaos, Tsarist Russia had been low in culture and character and,
for so large a country with such resources, far from rich. But the
three years of the European War, the ensuing two years of the White
and the Polish War, and the two years subsequently of famine and
disease, had made a wilderness of the vast land. Anyone who does
not realize that ought to look into a good annual, like the Annual
Register, for 1923 and 1924. It was still a few years before the
Communist statesmen could begin serious construction, and I repeat
that what they did between 1928 and 1940 is beyond all historical
precedents. All the world knows it today.

     Hence when American writers so far removed from Communism as
John Dewey, Durant, etc. began to assert this fact the anti-
Socialist slogan was discredited and criticism, to be plausible,
had to be confined to the supposed interference with religion. Here
again priests and bankers joined hands, and the most unscrupulous
priests of all were the Roman Catholic. Although, particularly in
Britain, the charge of persecuting religion was, as we shall see,
officially disproved years ago, we must admit that the Church of
Rome was not the only offender. The entry of Russia into the war
roused the same ecclesiastical fussiness in England as in, America,
to which Mr. Roosevelt's unhappy instruction to Harriman bears
witness. The President of the Baptist World Alliance publicly
denied Maisky's claim that religion is, and has been for years,
free in Russia. To that we will return but we, at once, recognize
one distinction between Protestant and Catholic anti-Communism. The
Protestant Churches wanted such diplomatic pressure as their
government could bring to bear upon Moscow, but as I have quoted
repeatedly in the Pope's own words, the Vatican wanted Communism
extinguished by war.

     Some of my readers may occasionally regard my language about
that Church, which is treated with profound respect in most papers,
as over-emphatic, but candidly, could any man with moderate
historical knowledge characterize in milder terms the effrontery of
the Vatican's diatribes against Russia? Hell hath no fury like a 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               9

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

Pope's scorn, of course, but most people do not expect the strident
and unreasoning language of a rejected suitor from the heads of any
Church, and for the Popes to complain of persecution is simply
grotesque. Ever since Europe returned to some degree of mental
sanity in the 20th Century the Popes have relied on savage
persecution to maintain their power and of the half-million
democrats who forfeited their lives for freedom in the 19th Century
all but a few hundred were victims of Catholic authorities, lay and
clerical acting together.

     But there is no need to go into history. In our own day, we
have seen repeatedly in this series of books, Rome follows the old
policy of persecution wherever it can. We saw that the Catholic
Church and authorities of Poland maintained a brutal persecution of
the Orthodox Catholics in the Galician Ukraine, indeed of
Protestants in Poland itself, from 1919 to 1939. We saw that when
Pacelli had traversed South America the most terrible persecution,
including torture, broke out everywhere. It followed the seizure of
power from the Socialists by the Catholics of Vienna. . . . In
short, the policy has been enforced wherever the Vatican had the
power to enforce right down to the time, only a few months ago,
when the priests of Croatia and Bulgaria fell upon the priests of
the Serb Church.

     The supreme irony is that, as I have shown until most of my
readers must be tired. of it, in its Canon Law today the Church
lays down that it "can and must put heretics to death." Catholics
in Britain and America are so keen to prevent this from becoming
generally known that it astonishes most people. Only two days ago
I had a letter from a businessman asking where he could buy a copy
of this Canon Law as, if that is impossible -- as it is, for the
Vatican Press alone publishes it, and only for priests -- whether
I could get for him a photostat of the page -- there are five or
six pages -- making the claim! I have not found any priest bold
enough to deny it in writing for the non-Catholic public. The
modern world rightly laughs at the idea of Roman priests burning
heretics, or forcing the police to burn them, in the market-place,
but there is here a serious question of principle. The great
majority of people in every advanced modern civilization claim
freedom to go to church or stay away, to accept a religious creed
or reject them all. Why do we tolerate all this fuss about "freedom
of religion" from Catholic writers and priests who say they will,
wherever they get the power, suppress all freedom of irreligion?
Clerical-Fascist power has in our own time fallen truculently upon
tens of millions of seceders from the Church in Italy, Spain,
Portugal, France, and Latin America, and none are more vehement
than these countries in demanding the blood of the Bolsheviks
because they put certain mild restriction's on the propaganda, not
the personal practice, of religion!

     There is another forgotten aspect which will interest every
man who wants honesty even in religious propaganda. I said that one
of the first things the Bolsheviks did was to release the head of
the Catholic Church in Russia from the jail to which "Holy Russia"
of Tsarist days had sent him. This was only a last trace of a
bitter persecution of Roman Catholics that the Orthodox Russians
had maintained for a century. Catholics now generally suppress the 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               10

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

facts -- though you may read some account of them in the Catholic
Encyclopedia, since it was written before 1920 -- in order to be
able to represent the "persecution of religion" as a wicked
practice introduced into Russia by those terrible Bolsheviks.

     In point of fact, such restrictions as the Bolshevik
authorities have really laid upon religion, apart from the legal
punishment of priests for treason, are trifles in comparison with
what the Greek Catholics did to the Latin Catholics in the last
century. You will find it amusing to read in the article on Russia
in the Catholic Encyclopedia how 70 or 80 years ago Pope Pius IX
was using about his brothers in Christ of the Orthodox Church
exactly the same abusive language as the Vatican now uses about the
Bolsheviks! But what was then done out of religious hatred -- we
must admit that the chief ground was that the Russian Catholics
were then, as now, mostly Poles and political intriguers -- was far
worse than Catholic's have suffered in Soviet Russia. Hundreds of
priests were hanged and whole communities of nuns were raped and
brutally treated. They were stripped and flogged and in some cases
burned alive. Young Catholic nuns were put in Orthodox convents,
and it was hell. One Orthodox mother-superior took an axe to one of
these stubborn Romanist nuns. At one place a number of nuns were
put in sacks, and dragged over the surface of lakes in winter, the
people cheering from the banks. Monks had to let down their pants
and sit on the ice. I really wonder why Father Walsh did not get
hold of some of these true stories of 80 years ago and turn them
into Bolshevik outrages of 1923 and 1924!

     These, things make a mockery of all this modern twaddle about
cruel Atheists and sadistic Bolsheviks. And when we examine the
stories which are offered us even by writers who pose as experts we
find them often grotesque. There is, for instance, a much-consulted
history of the early Bolshevik years by Lancelot Lawton (The
Russian Revolution, 1927). Most people know only that he was a
correspondent in Russia of the Liberal Daily Chronicle and not that
-- so a Russian official assured me -- he married a White Russian.
Most of the folk who talk about the horrors of the early years
would quote Lawton. Well, here is a specimen of his "history." He
says, "The number of ecclesiastical persons executed from 1917 to
1920 was 8,050, including 1,275 bishops." How magnanimous of the
Vatican to press its friendship upon Russia after such a ghastly
slaughter! But if you put together the details given in the
Catholic Encyclopedia and its supplement and the last edition of
the Encyclopedia Britannica you will be relieved to find that in
1917 there were not more than 80 archbishops and bishops, of both
Churches, in Russia, and most of them escaped -- the Encyclopedia
Britannica describes 15 of them setting up a synod in Belgrade --
or went to prison for intrigue with the invaders. It is a nice
example of the "historical" basis for the talk about Bolshevik
atrocities and persecution of religion.

     As far as the Roman Catholics are concerned we may follow Miss
Almedinger because she not only lived in Russia at the time but she
is so really religious that she won't lie even in the good cause.
She tells us that one Catholic bishop and a number of anonymous
Catholics were put to death and admits that they were guilty in
Russian law. Bolshevik law was so wicked that it imposed sentence 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               11

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

of death on traitors or men who intrigued with and helped the
invaders. One of the most impartial histories of the time, J.H.
Jackson's Post-War World (1935, p. 189) says that "no case has been
discovered of a priest or anyone else being punished for the
practice of religion." Those words, we shall see presently, are
part of the official report of the British ambassador and were read
in the British House of Commons by the Foreign Secretary (a vary
religious man). The charge has been so discredited that it does not
appear in the supplement of the Catholic Encyclopedia which was
published after the alleged period of sanguinary persecution, but
other Catholic writers sustain throughout the world the tattered
legend of Bolshevik atrocities. It is the chief foundation for
their gospel of hatred of Russia and their demand (until recently)
that other powers should make war upon it.

     The period in question is still as obscure as some parts of
ancient history, for the confusion was such that few authentic
records were kept while the intense passion on both sides gave rise
to vast quantities of reckless rumors. There is again a real
analogy with the French Revolution -- with the true story of the
revolution for, as I said, Lenin and Stalin no more interfered with
religion for the first few years, beyond disestablishing the
corrupt Orthodox Church and nationalizing its superfluous wealth,
than the leaders of the French Revolution had done. And in both
cases it was hostile invasion and the intrigues of the clergy with
the invaders which soured the people and forced the hand of the
authorities. After the November Revolution Lenin repudiated the
huge foreign debt incurred by the Tsarists, and foreign armies were
sent to help the Whites or refugee imperialists. About 300,000
Whites, Poles, Rumanians, Czechs, Japanese, British, American and
French entered the distressed and impoverished country for the
purpose of destroying the new regime, and there never was a more
savage war. As in the French Revolution, again, the refugees told
wild stories (as is now definitely proved by French histories) of
the number of victims. The Russians say 50,000. Some unprejudiced
historians suggest between 100,000 and 200,000. But even so
responsible an organ as the London Times gave the figure as
7,700,000 with just such impossible exaggerations in detail as that
I quoted from Lawton.

     The Poles continued this war when the other Allies quit, and
at a time when the country suffered as no other land has done in
modern times, and it would be absurd to doubt that the Catholic
clergy and the peasants they controlled did all they could to help
them. At one time it looked as if the Poles were likely to win and
restore the autocracy of the Church. In any case the vast majority
of the Roman Catholics left in Russia after the detachment of
provinces to form Poland, Latvia, and Lithuania, were Poles. How
many there were no one knows. They were too poor for the Church to
organize them. The Catholic Encyclopedia claims 5,000,000 and then
talks of dioceses in which there was only one priest to 5,000 or
even 10,000 Catholics! There were probably not a million subjects
of the Pope then in Russia, and the number today is negligible. It
was the heritage of the Orthodox Church for which the Vatican was
fighting.




                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               12

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

     The Orthodox clergy and the few Romanist priests continued to
intrigue with Poland and the White refugees abroad, and there were
further executions. Any fair-minded man ought to recognize the real
character of these after the official verdict given in the British
House of Commons. In 1929 some of the religious members of
Parliament, under Church pressure, shamelessly ignoring the rule
that one country does not interfere in the internal affair's of
another, insisted that the government should inquire into the
persecution of religion in Russia. This, it will be remembered, was
the year in which the Papacy signed its Concordat with Mussolini,
and desperate efforts were made to get Mussolini to forbid the
practice of any religion but the Roman in Italy. Severe
restrictions were, in fact, put on Protestantism, and the grossest
intolerance to seceders from the Church was embodied in the law,
with the approval of those Catholics in all countries who continued
to talk about Russian persecution of religion. The oracle of
American Catholicism, Msgr. Ryan, blandly explained it on the
principle that truth has rights but error none!

     However, the British government asked its ambassador in
Moscow, Sir Esmond Ovey, for a report, and it contained this
sentence which was read to the House of Commons by the Foreign
Secretary, the pious Henderson -- the government was then under
that arch-trimmer Ramsay Macdonald, who was at one time a personal
friend of mine and a complete Agnostic -- on April 23 and reported
in the press next day:

     "There is no religious persecution in Russia, in the strict
sense of the word persecution, and no case has been discovered of
a priest or anyone else being punished for practicing religion."

     It is characteristic of the way in which the public is
educated by its press in our time, under pressure of Roman
Catholicism, that a persecution of the Ukrainians by the Poles on
the ground of religion (as well as nationality) was then at its
height and only three papers in Britain and America dared refer to
it. At the most Russia restricted religious folk to their own
premises while in Poland priests opposed to Rome were flogged,
grossly insulted, robbed and jailed. But did you hear any outcry
about the persecution of religion in Poland or any demand that
American or British authorities ought to make an inquiry?

     To this official assurance that no priest or anyone had been
"punished for practicing religion" could be added the words of a
large number of religious leaders, in Russia itself. In a booklet
published in America (The Soviet War on Religion, 1930) Mr.
Sherwood gives, with exact reference to the date of publication in
the Russian press, a number of these admissions. One is signed by
three archbishops of the Orthodox Church (p. 27), one by 31 Jewish
rabbis, (p. 28), one by a group of Roman Catholic priests, and so
on. They insist that there is no persecution, say that the stories
of atrocities are "inventions and slanders unworthy of serious
peoples attention" and that there is no question even of "pressure"
on them, and that there had been general political intrigue on the
part of the clergy, especially of the Roman Church. The Catholic
priests, admitting this, actually say:



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               13

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

     "The dark era of oppression has disappeared without a trace,
together with the Tsardom which maintained it, and the star of
liberty has begun to shine with its bright radiance on the life of
the Catholic Church" (p. 29).

     This was in 1927 and refutes the strongest claims of
atrocities, which are located before that date. Yet the Vatican not
merely encouraged the circulation of those stories in the Catholic
Church but actually became more vitriolic in its indictment of
Russia after that date; just at the time when its pets (Spain,
Portugal, the South American Republics, Italy and Austria) were
beginning to enforce a policy of persecution of religion.

     Putting aside therefore all stories of execution or outrage on
the ground of religion, which are thus disproved by the best
authorities, what is the law or practice in regard to religion
which, though it ought to be well known at Washington, moves Mr.
Roosevelt to raise the question of freedom of religion in such form
as to suggest that there is none, or only a restricted liberty, in
Russia? The prominence given in the press to the President's
instruction to Mr. Harriman led Keesing's Contemporary Archives to
insert at that date (October 18, 1941, p. 4848) one of its
impartial explanatory notes. It speaks of the "corruption" and
"fabulous wealth" of the Tsarist Orthodox Church and says that the
action taken against its clergy after the Revolution was taken on
the ground of "their secular activities rather than religious
partisanship." Whatever the ground no one who knows anything about
the old Church will feel surprise that in June 1918 the Church was
disestablished, the ecclesiastical property (nearly $4,000,000,000
worth of land) nationalized, religious education excluded from the
schools, and missionary activities suppressed. Within these limits
every Russian was free to follow his conscience. This was the
extent of persecution of religion in the years of the first violent
reaction against the foul older era.

     It is complained that the Soviet authorities then gave all the
unofficial assistance they could to the Atheist League which was
rapidly weaning the people from religion. It is rather funny to
read this complaint in countries in which the political authorities
do everything in their power to help the Churches; and the Soviet
authorities were more deeply and sincerely convinced that religion
is prejudicial to progress than democratic statesmen are that it is
beneficial, to say nothing of the treasonable activities of the
Russian clergy. It is complained also that, as time went on a large
number of seminaries, monasteries, and churches were closed. In
hundreds of instances the churches were converted to more useful
purposes at the request of the people who used to frequent them,
and political intrigue sufficiently excuses the closing of
seminaries and monasteries. The writer of the note in Keesing
quaintly says that "in spite of all this" the Orthodox Church
counted 98,000,000 communicants and the Roman Church 11,000,000
members, but "the last census," to which he appeals was taken in
1913!

     We will try presently to ascertain how many folk in Russia
still belong to the Churches and will continue here to examine this
supposedly neutral account. As Russia entered into relations with 
other countries the zeal against religion was modified. In 1935 the

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               14

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

attempt to suppress the celebration of Christmas was dropped, the
more violent literature of the Atheist League was withdrawn from
the bookstores, and the famous anti-Christian museums, with their
caricatures of religion, became respectable museum's of religion!
In 1939 there was, this writer says, a great religious revival,
though "not within the framework of the Churches." How Christian
writers love vague phrases like that. In plain English the Churches
continued to lose, but there were now large numbers of priests who
fought to modernize theology, even to combine Communism with a "new
Christianity," and there was a good deal of fresh discussion of
religion. At the outbreak of the war with Germany the government --
the Christian Science Monitor announced -- suppressed the Atheist
paper (Bezboznik).

     In other words, the increasing danger from Germany induced the
authorities to take various steps which might mitigate the hatred
of Russia which the Churches inspired in America and Britain, but
the law was not altered, and Mr. Roosevelt seems to have been
persuaded that it contained an element of persecution of religion.
Senator Smith bluntly put it: "Harriman's job seems to be to try to
get Stalin to join the Church so we can call him brother." We all
understood what it really meant. The representatives of Churches at
Washington thought it a good opportunity to get Russian law made
more favorable to religion. What is wrong with the law?

     As Maisky, speaking to the American Chamber of Commerce in
London on September 23, and Lozovsky in Moscow said, its
fundamental principle is that all religions are free and equal;
which we were always asked to regard as one of the finest
achievements of the American Constitution. Let me repeat, as so few
seem to realize it, that you will not find that just law and
elementary human right conceded in any Roman Catholic country in
the world today. Even in Eire and Quebec there is no religious
equality, and the more docile to the Vatican Catholic states are,
the more of its Canon Law they admit into their legislation, the
more intolerant they are. Persecution of religion -- any religion
that rejects the Pope's authority -- is, we have seen, a first
principle of Catholic law and theology. And, though we moderns
insist that the non-religious man has the same right to liberty as
the members of any Church, the intolerance is in this respect worse
than ever. The Vatican's first excuse for its demand of the
extinction of Bolshevism is that the Russians are Atheists.

     Maisky later added to his statement of Russian law. The
government, which owns all property, puts a building at the
disposal of any group of worshipers and charges no rent or taxes.
Certainly a queer kind of persecution of religion! The police
arrest and the courts punish any who "violate the rights of
believers." Ministers of all religions have just the Same Political
and legal rights as other citizens.

     To this the President of the Baptist World Alliance made a
heated reply, and we may take it that his letter enumerates every
respect in which he and his colleagues see the shadow of
persecution. Worshipers, he says, must confine their worship to a
church. Sunday Schools and religious lesions to children are
forbidden. The Churches must have no social gatherings, no 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               15

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

lectures, and no libraries. Mr. Rushbrooke might be advised to
compare these restrictions on priests with the restrictions on
Protestant Churches and Atheists in Catholic lands; and if he
replies that Protestants do not do these things the answer is
simple. They certainly did in England until, in the 19th Century,
the Church of England, which inspired the law. dropped to a
minority. We might even raise a question about Baptist tolerance in
certain states of America, but it is enough to reflect that
Baptists or Methodists were never yet the majority in any country
so we must not be too sure what they would or would not do if they
had the power.

     To sum up the contents of this chapter and give the reader a
clear idea on an issue that often confronts him in his reading,
there is no truth in the stories that Catholics, Orthodox or Roman,
were ever physically persecuted in Russia, that is to say, ever
sent to, jail, much less executed, for belonging to a Church or
practicing religion. An unknown number of bishops and priests,
which in certain cases we have definitely proved to be exaggerated
fifteen-fold, were put to death in the dark early years, but the
ground was political, and our religious authorities admit that the
clergy did quite generally conspire with attempts to subvert the
government. We do not blame them when they saw a chance of the
restoration of the Church to wealth and power, but it is silly to
call this persecution. The law of treason is much the same in every
country, and Russia was in such circumstances at the time that a
drastic application of the law was essential.

     As to later years and the present time we frankly admit that
the Churches are not free to do what they like in Russia. The
restrictions are mild in comparison with the restrictions on
religion imposed in Catholic countries, and we very justly resent
the practice of calling them persecution and implying that they are
something peculiar to Soviet Russia. That is implied in the great
majority of reference's to religion in Russia, and not a word of
appreciation is given the Bolsheviks for their introduction of the
principle of individual freedom of conscience. The restrictions are
that the priests must not impose religious doctrines on children,
who can't argue with their teachers, or do propaganda other than by
holding religious services which any person may attend.

     Apart from those whose admiration of Russia is so great that
we might regard their judgment as biased, Atheists would differ
about the propriety of these restrictions. We must, however, at
least not judge the Russian authorities in the light of our
experience in America. The Russian Church, which alone we need
consider since the Roman brand of Catholicism is nearly dead, has
been an enemy of the people for a thousand years. It allowed the
Tsars and the nobles to keep nearly half a million peasants until
100 years ago in the state of slavery (serfdom) which Europe
generally abolished 700 years ago. It supported a corrupt and
murderous autocracy until 1917. It continued for the next 10 years
to help every attempt to destroy a regime in which, whatever else
you may think of it, the wealth produced by the people is shared
amongst the people. To me personally it seems that if the Soviet
authorities still think it dangerous, they have the right to impose
these mild restrictions. Please yourself. They do not care the toss


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               16

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

of a coin what you and I think about it. But as a vast amount of
evil has been done by the Churches, and most particularly the
Vatican, spreading a hatred of Russia, I have had to show that
there is no justification for this in any persecution of religion.

                           Chapter III

                     THE PAPAL HYMN OF HATE

     I invite the readers' particular attention to the
chronological parallel between the successive phases of the
Vatican's attitude to Russia and the developments in that country.
I have briefly referred to it but it deserves careful
consideration. Until about 1925, when Jesuit Bishop D'Herbigny was
still trying to get a foothold in Russia, the Vatican made friendly
approaches to the Soviet government. Apart from the futile gesture
of the Genoa Conference no other power in the world was so amiable
with Russia, and the country itself was in a very miserable
condition. Long after that year our papers and novelists, were
still serving up pictures of Russians in rags clinging to
ramshackle overcrowded cars, sadistic officials of the 0.G.P.U. who
had innocent maids waiting in the ante-rooms until they had
finished their champagne-orgies, priests boiled in oil or burned in
lime, and go on.

     During the next ten years the world-hostility to Russia
moderated. There was always money for a fiery indictment of the
Soviet system, but level-headed men began to see that Russia had
got on to a line on which it might travel far. During this
indecisive period the Vatican had not much to say about Russia as
far as I can ascertain. Locally members of the Black International
like the American Jesuit Walsh might inflame sentiment against
Russia. Business and financial men were not really very sensitive
about outrages of religion. They were more deeply pained by the
refusal of the Soviet authorities to pay interest on the Tsarist
loans and on British and American investments. But if there were a
few million folk who believed Walsh's stories and helped to swell
the feeling against Russia, it was all to the good. Still the
Papacy, as I said, was fairly quiet about Russia. In fact, as lite
as 1930 the Pope politely summoned the Catholic world, not to
agitate for war but to pray fervently for Russia, the consequences
of which I cannot discover.

     About 1934 what we might broadly call the third phase of
Russia's internal development and relation to other power's began.
Russia had after so many years of bovine prejudice become rather
indifferent to the opinion of the outside world but it received a
large number of visitors from America and Britain every year, and
men and women of very different schools and respected character
wrote in high appreciation of its recovery. So neutral an authority
as the Statesmen's Year Book showed that Russia more than doubled
its annual production of wealth from 1932 to 1935 -- a feat far
beyond the achievement of any other country -- and there were no
rich men to absorb any of it. Duranty has written sympathetic
accounts for years to the New York Times, and his volume of
articles (Russia Reported, 1934) made a deep impression. In the
same year Sherwood Eddy's Russia Today, written from a different 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               17

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

rather conservative angle, confirmed the impression. A lady of the
Tsarist family who had settled in America, Countess Skaryatina,
still very conservative and religious, had the courage to go to
Russia and the honesty to say that the Bolsheviks had made great
progress (First to Go Back, 1935). An equally conservative British
general, W.H. Waters, also a lover of the old regime, paid a visit
and made the same report. Sir Bernard Pares, high British authority
on the East and for years a heavy critic of Bolsheviks, now gave a
very appreciative account and joined the "Friends of Russia." He
spoke of a "hostile foreign diplomat" in Moscow who grudgingly
admitted to him that "the Bolsheviks have won all along the line."
We shall see other equally notable impartial witnesses later.

     Naturally, the literature about Russia was very mixed. Some
writers expressly catered to the chronic demand for blood-curdling
stories of the O.G.P.U. and the poor folk who wept when their icons
were torn away from them. Others, with milder prejudice, denounced
Russia because it had no political elections of the democratic
purity of those of America or because the workers, who a few years
ago had been the worst paid and most ignorant in Europe, had not
yet risen to the high standard of American workers -- not
mentioning that there was no unemployment in Russia and the workers
had vast free social services and cheap rents in the cities.
Typical was the work of Sir W. Citrine, who went with all the
prejudice which the British Labor Party still stupidly fostered and
poked into tenements to see if the baths all had stoppers, and
after traveling hundreds of miles found a woman who seemed no
better than she ought to be and something like a slum (such as he
could have found within a mile of his house in London).

     However, my point here is that as appreciation of Russia grew
in the rest of the world the attitude of the Vatican to it became
more somber and bitter, Catholic apologists are nothing if not bold
but I have not yet heard of one who has asked us to admire the Pope
because he was friendly to Russia when the rest of the world was
venomous and became critical only when, and in proportion as, it no
longer needed friends. We might get near the truth if we remember
that the power behind the Pope, the Secretary of State, was changed
in 1930. Pacelli, the present Pope, an aristocrat to his toenails,
then became the dictator at the Vatican, for the Pope was very old
and feeble. We might remember, too, that Pacelli entered, at the
end of 1932, into a policy of friendliness to Germans, and Germany
was pledged by its, bible, Hitler's book, to make war sooner or
later on Russia.

     When precisely the Vatican began to snarl at Russia it is
difficult to determine. The Encyclical Quadrazesimo anno of May 15,
1931 makes the earliest reference that I find, and the hand of
Pacelli in that vapid manifesto is clear. It is a recommendation of
the Corporative State to all Catholic countries; in fact, to the
whole world, as the Pope ingenuously remarks that the truth on even
the social and economic order can come only from Rome. How
journalists ever stoop to praise these Papal utterances on Social
questions puzzles me. They are like the ideas of a Baptist preacher
in Tennessee blinded with those of Thomas Aquinas and almost lost
in a jelly of Latin verbiage. There is, as I have already
explained, no English translation of this Encyclical, because it 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               18

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

approves -- indeed imposes -- such restrictions on capitalism and
private enterprise as are provided in Mussolini's Corporative
State, which industrialists in America who are assured by Catholic
writers that their "freedom of the individual is thoroughly
Catholic, detest almost as much as Socialism.

     The Pope tells the world, with quite an air of profundity and
originality, that Socialism has split into moderate Socialism and
Communism. As we saw, and it may be convenient to repeat, he
answers the question, on which, he says, Rome has often been
consulted, whether a Catholic can be a Socialist by saying that
"Socialism, as long as it remains real Socialism . . . cannot be
reconciled with the teaching of the Catholic Church." He insists
that "religious Socialism or Christian Socialism is a contradiction
in terms," and he winds up by saying that "no genuine Socialist can
be a good Catholic." That is another reason why the Encyclical is
not translated into English. It might prevent Catholic writers for
the workers from continuing to say, as they do, that the Church has
never condemned Socialism; while Catholic writer's for the wealthy,
like Ryan, tell them that the Church regards any attack on private
ownership as a sin.

     However, the Pope is still more drastic when he passes on to
Communism. It is too "impious" to consider. When it gets power it
shrinks from nothing "however atrocious and inhuman." As Russia was
the only country in which it had power this was pointed enough, but
the Pope goes on to speak of "the massacres (strange) and ruin it
has brought upon Eastern Europe and Asia." There may be earlier
pronouncements on Russian atrocities for all I know but this is ten
years old. A Jesuit writer quotes from the British Communist Daily
Worker an account of a meeting in the offices of that paper on
December 30, 1932 which passed a valiant resolution to attack
religion "considering that the clergy of all creeds and
denominations are, with religion as their pretext, following the
lead of the Pope in his call for a crusade against the U.S.S.R."
They resolved:

". . . to organize an unflinching resistance to every variety of
religious attack . . . to vindicate the policy of the U.S.S.R. in
regard to religion and the Churches against all and every attack .
. . to urge the complete separation of Church and State and the
complete exclusion of religion from the school," and so on.

     Communists must feel like biting the carpet when they reflect
how they abandoned that attitude. A few years later, when I was
writing my Militant Atheist -- perhaps the most congenial work I
ever did -- a member of the staff of the Daily Worker asked me to
call at the office, making a definite appointment, to see him as he
edited a column of the Dally Worker with that title and would like
to cooperate. I called -- and saw none but the editors who
explained that they had changed their policy and no longer thought
it of any importance to attack the Churches.

     It was a mistake even of Moscow to drop the criticism of
religion while adhering slavishly to everything else that Marx had
said. American and British Communists, on whom they relied for
information, told them that the bitter hostility to them would 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               19

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

cease if they quit criticizing religion. One or two influential
cleric's like the Dean of Canterbury had taken to patronizing
Russia, and publishers (skeptics) who felt that Rationalism checked
trade added their persuasion. In May 1938 the Communist
International published in England for America and Britain, had an
article which would, if there were any truth in superstition, have
made Marx turn in his grave. I am quoting the Jesuit Ryder at the
Cambridge Summer School of Russian Studies in 1938. The article,
headed "The Revolutionary Proletariat and the Catholic Masses,"
recommends the policy of conciliating Catholics and Protestants.
The Soviet Union, it claimed, was "realizing the ideals of
Christianity," and Communists must "not ignore the more than
400,000,000 Catholics of the world"; which is 50,000,000 more than
the more optimistic Catholics claim and double the true figure. The
writer poured scorn on "the Left phrasemongers" who attack the
policy of "the outstretched hand" and, by a tour de force, said
that "we come forward in the defense of religion against the
Fascist persecution of believers" yet had not the least idea of
deviating from the teaching of Marx! We recognize the accents of
the American and British Communists, who were at that time offering
cooperation to the Catholic Church. Now there is "a smile on the
face of the tiger." The blood of Communists reddens the earth in
Catholic Austria, Slovakia, Croatia, Spain, Portugal, Vichy France,
Italy, Brazil, Peru, etc. etc.

     In so far as Moscow was involved in this change of policy,
chiefly owing to false information from Britain and America, we
have an extraordinary situation. The change was carried out just at
the time when the Vatican was inflaming Catholic sentiment against
Russia all over the world and beginning to call for war upon
Russia; and the change brought about no modification whatever of
the world-cry of "persecution of religion in Russia." What moved
the papacy to enter upon this more bitter and more dangerous
campaign? I say more dangerous because it would be difficult to
exaggerate the profit to the Axis of this Papal preaching of hatred
of Russia in every Catholic land and amongst the Catholics of all
countries.

     The reasons given by the Vatican, as in the above Encyclical,
are puerile. In speaking of the "massacres" -- it is interesting
that in his Latin text Pacelli uses just the word which the Pope
put on his gold medal of triumph at the time of the St. Bartholomew
Massacre -- which the Bolsheviks committed he endorses the wild
legends and lies which I have disproved from Catholic writers. As
to their having brought "ruin" upon the land, the Pope, granting
him sincerity, seems to have been as crudely ignorant of Russian
affairs as a nun in a Quebec convent. By 1931 the Bolsheviks had
saved Russia from the real ruin which the White War (zealously
supported by the two Churches) had brought upon Russia and were
rapidly restoring prosperity and creating one of the finest
educational and social services in the world.

     His attacks in 1936 and his broadcasts to Spain in 1939 -- in
fact, all his characterizations of Bolshevism in his appeals for
war from 1935 onward -- are just as childish. I quoted elsewhere
the address of Pius XI to Spanish refugees in 1936, in, which he
plainly invited the destruction of Bolshevism "from Russia to
China, from Mexico to South America." The reference to South 

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               20

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

America is cool, as Pacelli, who clearly wrote the address, had
just got Communism violently destroyed in nearly every republic.
But the whole diatribe is fatuous. Everywhere, the Pope says, there
is "a satanic preparation" for the work of "subverting established
orders of every kind" and "attacking every institution, human and
divine." At that very time, philosophers like Professor Dewey,
Liberal individualists like Sir Ernest Simon (brother of Sir John
Simon), and a few clerics like the Dean of Canterbury were
describing to the public how Russia was creating a new social order
which in its care for children, women, and the mass of the people,
had no equal in history.

     We may make allowance for the real ignorance of Pacelli and
the Vatican. They never even try to get accurate information about
movements or bodies which are offensive to them on religious
grounds. They see everything through a red haze of professional
piety. But there is deliberate policy behind it all. By 1935 Japan
had got the innocent western powers to support Chiang Kai-shek in
his costly campaign to crush Communism in China and smooth the way
for Japan itself. Hitler and Mussolini were wondering how they
could get the same powers to overlook their proposed intervention
in Spain. Hitler was repeating in public speeches that the noble
German race must have the Ukraine. Wall Street wanted a good
pretext for stirring the country to attack Mexico. Labor and
Socialist movements everywhere were to be encouraged in their
tragic policy of attacking and disowning Communists so as to
prevent the formation of a Popular Front until it was too late.
This sacred fury against Bolshevism was one of the Vatican's
greatest contributions to the preparation of the world for the
onslaught of barbarism.

     But, you may ask, is it possible that the Pope, the Black
International which forced his slogan upon the Catholic masses
(which do not read encyclical's) in every country, and the Catholic
press which made "the extinction of Bolshevism" as familiar to
Catholics as "Heil Hitler" is to Germans and ... "Mussolini solo"
to Italians, realized what they were doing?

     You can analyze that for yourself. There is, of course, no
documentary evidence beyond the very plain evidence that the Papacy
blessed the rebellion and the intervention of Italy and Germany in
Spain and just as plainly wanted war on Russia. It must seem
equally certain to anyone who knows the ecclesiastical mind that
the Vatican and the Black International in America wanted war for
the annexation of Mexico. The Knights of Columbus, who may be
considered unconsecrated members of the Black International, made
open offers of alliance with Wall Street and called for
intervention in Mexico. Whether the Pope and the unscrupulous
Italian branch of the Black International knew in advance of the
war upon the western democracies we have considered in other
booklets. As I there said, so objective a review as the Annual
Record gives it as commonly received information, that Ribbentrop
told the Pope in April that the Germans would be in Paris in June
and in London in August. As to the main body of Catholics who
chanted the anti-Bolshevik slogan, they were probably as hazy about
what they meant as the average German is about the pure Aryan
sharing the world with a race of Mongolian-Malayan mongrels.


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               21

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

     One of the most ironic features of it all, if there is any
room for irony in considering the colossal tragedy, is that Russia,
the irreligion of which is blamed by the Vatican for all the
world's troubles, is more religious than Great Britain or than
France was before Vichy.

     The question how many of the people of Russia are still
religious has been raised innumerable times, and it has invariably
been answered with all the slovenliness and inconsistency that are
characteristic of such discussions. Generally the writers spoke of
"atheistic Russia" as if it were a phenomenally irreligious
country, but when they recollected that religion was supposed to be
indestructible or when the plain evidence (which we have seen) that
there is no persecution of religion and any few dozen men and women
can get a building from the government for worship was produced the
writers gave us pictures of crowds packing the churches on
festivals. As long as there was some dead cat to fling at Russia --
like the common misrepresentation of the trials, and executions of
leading Russians for treason -- we were reminded that the governing
body is solidly atheistic, and when some reputable author testified
that the social service is the most generous and most humane in the
world we were told Russia is still far more religious than is
commonly supposed.

     On one point there is no controversy. The officials, from
those in the smallest town to Stalin, are all Atheists. The
Communist party governs Russia -- hence the stupidity of calling
Stalin a dictator like Hitler and Mussolini -- and all its members
are Atheists. These officials determine the form and institutions
of the state. The mass of the people produce the wealth, of course,
and in that sense create the state, but these atheist officials
direct the distribution of it and are responsible for all social
legislation. They have given a form to the state which now elicits
the admiration of writers of every class. They have lifted the
average Russian character high above the level at which it was in
the religious Tsarist days, -- when atheism was confined to a
relatively small minority, with no influence on the state, in the
cities. This unquestionable truth is one of the chief reasons why
the clergy hate or fear it, and why the worst discredited libels of
it are still in circulation. Russia -- the creative part of Russia
-- has not merely disproved the common claim that a state decays
when atheism spreads. It has shown that the reality is the exact
opposite.

     The question what proportion of the mass of the people are
still Christians is, therefore, of no importance, but you will find
it amusing to assure your neighbor whose idea of Russia is taken
from the press that it is much more religious than Great Britain.
The Church of England a few year's ago appointed a committee to
inquire carefully how many people in England go to church or are in
any definite sense Christians. They reported, and the leaders of
other Churches agreed: 10 percent in London and 20 percent in the
rest of England. This -- a total of 8,000,000 or 9,000,000 in
42,000,000 -- fairly agrees with the statistic's of membership
annually published by the Churches, and these are always
optimistic. There is evidence that the Churches put the figure of
churchgoers too high but let us accept them here. Between three-


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               22

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

fourths and four-fifths of the people of Great Britain are not
Christians. It was the same in France, and Vichy has made only a
superficial compulsory change. In America the Churches claim 55
percent of the people, but we know what these claims are worth.
Allowing for the Bible Belt and the greater wealth and business
organizations of the Churches in America we should expect a higher
proportion of churchgoers: say, two-thirds of the total population.

     It follows that Russia is, on the best available estimates, as
religious as the United States and much more religious than Great
Britain or France! The best gauge is Yaroslavsky, the able and
accomplished leader of the Atheist League. He has several times
estimated that about one-third of the people in the Soviet Union
are still Christians. The Jesuit Ryder, speaking at the Cambridge
Summer School of Russian States, said, that this mean's 30,000,000
and is a ridiculous under-estimate. It is his jesuitical arithmetic
that is ridiculous. One-third of the population means nearly
60,000,000. But notice what follows. If you call Yaroslavsky's
estimate too small you must mean that more than a third are still
Christians, or a far higher proportion than in Great Britain and
France, and probably America. On any estimate Russia is more
religious than Great Britain. Now that it is smashing Germany the
clergy begin to say: We always thought so.

     Maisky, addressing the American Chamber of Commerce in London
on September 23, 1941, gave some figures which seem at first sight
to show that Yaroslavsky greatly over-estimated instead of under-
estimating the number of believer's. He quoted an official
statement that on June 1, 1941, there were 8,338 churches, mosques,
and synagogues in the Union, and 30,000 registered religious
societies (or, as we should say, parishes) of 20 or more person's.
But there must be here a serious misprint as to the number of
churches. Considering that there are about 10,000,000 Jews and
Romanists and 14,000,000 Moslem in the Soviet Union besides members
of the Orthodox Church the error is apparent. Great Britain has
more than 40,000 churches and chapels to less than 10,000,000
churchgoers. America has 200,000 religious organizations (organized
units or parishes) to less than 50,000,000 church-goers. If the
figure of 8,000 churches, mostly in villages, in Russia were
correct we should have to allow more than 7,000 worshipers to a
church to make even 60,000,000. As I have no access to the Soviet
official announcement (on August 15, 1941) I have to leave the
matter open, but we may reflect that if the figure of 30,000
parishes is correct it suggests less than 60,000,000 worshipers.

     We do better to follow the estimate of Yaroslavsky, who has no
interest in exaggerating the number of churchgoers, and we may
reflect that the change from the solid orthodoxy of the
overwhelming mass of the people less than thirty years ago means
that Atheism spread more rapidly between 1920 and 1940 than any
religion in history ever spread in 100 years; indeed forty or fifty
times as rapidly as Christianity spread in the first 250 years of
its career. We might also invite the attention of some of our
modern skeptics to the fact that it was mainly effected by pointing
out the absurdity of the current belief and the monstrous history
of the Orthodox Black International. Their is no religious revival
in recent years but there is evidence that suggests that the 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               23

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

extraordinarily rapid progress of Atheism has been slowed. This is
in part due to the fact that education has won nearly all but the
hard core of stubborn old folk -- though it is remarkable how
thousands of villages including nearly all their old folk quit the
Church and demanded that the chapel be converted into a library or
debating club -- and in part to the clergy of what calls itself the
New Church and turns the older Christian teaching inside out. It
is, however, clear that the discouragement by the government of the
methods of the Atheist League, which made a very extensive use of
ridicule and direct satirical attack, has retarded the spread of
Atheism.

     One would like to draw the attention of those very superior
Rationalists of our day who say that ridicule of religion "defeats
its own end" to this phenomenal success of such methods during 10
or 15 years. The Russian Atheists did not, of course, fail to
follow up their first direct assault on religious belief with solid
scientific and historical information. The cultural change in
Russia is not less remarkable than the economic. The gross general
ignorance and illiteracy of Tsarist Russia was many shades worse by
1923, after four years of war and famine. Yet by 1936 the country
had 164,081 schools besides 1,797 factory schools, 2,572 technical
schools, 716 workers colleges, 595 higher schools and universities,
and 794 institutions for scientific research. More than 10,000
newspapers and 2,100 magazines (700,000,000 copies) circulated. In
1935 the output of books was 42,700, and the 53,380 free libraries,
largely in villages, contained more than 100,000,000 books. Upon
this vast and finely selected literature the Atheist propagandist
drew, and he was welcomed in the 71,770 clubs (57,700 in the
villages) where the favorite entertainment was a serious debate. As
the government adheres to its law that religious doctrines shall
not be taught to children, who must be left to consider religion
when they have at least a moderate capacity to see through fallacy
and resent mere dogmatism, the young generation has for the far
greater part definitely abandoned religion. A very short account of
the cultural as well as economic development will be found in my
booklet Economic Gains of the Soviet Union (1937) in the A B C
Library of Living Knowledge.

     This is what the Pope calls destroying the very foundation's
of the social order: this is one line of the real program of
national life which our press until Russia became our ally
habitually coupled with the gross greed-programs of Germany, Italy,
and Japan as "the four totalitarian powers." Russia never received
and never sought to gain a single rouble by the labor of the people
outside its own Soviet Union, but there were few papers in the
world which, until we so urgently needed its help, did not class it
with the three powers which openly boasted they were going to
dominate and exploit most of the earth. Russia gave better
conditions to women (see Prof. Susan W. Kingsbury and Prof Mildred
Fairchild's Factory, Family, and Women in the Soviet Union, 1935)
than any other nation, while Germany and Italy, and the Pope's new
subjects states told woman to sacrifice all their hard-won rights
and confine themselves to cooking and bearing future soldiers.
Russia gave more sympathetic conditions to children (see Playtime
in Russia by Ethel Manning and others, 1935) than any other
country, allowing no distinction of class, giving all a two-month 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               24

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

vacation with entertainments or tours provided every summer, and
providing special theaters (three in Moscow) and parks (26 in
Moscow) for them; while Germany and Italy brutalized their lives
and minds with militarism. Russia encouraged the mass of the
workers to enjoy art as no other country did, while in Germany and
Italy art was starved and all culture debased.

     This was the civilization which the Pope taught the Catholics
of the world to curse and demand war against, and the more it shed
the imperfections due to its recent rise from chaos, the more it
won recognition for its splendid social ideals, the more bitterly
he attacked it, and the more stridently the Black International
broadcast his sentiments in every land. Is the complete collapse of
his Church in Russia enough to explain this? Is his failure to get
the billions of dollars and millions of members of the Orthodox
Church, the explanation? No, he hates Russia because it was showing
the world that you could not merely build a civilization without
priests but you could build a far finer, juster, more peaceful and
more humane civilization. He hate's Russia because from it there
spread, as far as China and Indo-China in the east and as far as
Peru and Chile in the west, that formidable Wave of Atheism which
I described in the second booklet of this series: because it was in
Roman Catholic countries particularly that it was effective since
Papal doctrine and history were as vulnerable as those of Orthodox
Russia.

     Some may say that a churchman, if his creed is sincere and
deeply felt, is bound to regard a spread of Atheism as a great evil
and may be understood even when he thinks war to prevent the spread
a lesser evil. There is no need for a profane person like myself to
discuss that question or to try to determine whether the Pope
really believes (as half the clergy do not) and deeply feels the
peculiar teaching of his Church about man and his destiny. We ask
a simple question: Why didn't he say so? Why need he give as the
pretext for his demand of war upon Russia every lie about Bolshevik
atrocities and persecution of religion that was current in
capitalist literature? Why did he assure the millions of ignorant
Catholics whom he wanted to inflame that the Bolsheviks were out to
destroy the moral and social order, to advocate cruelty and
violence, when it was easy for any man, to say nothing of a
billion-dollar international organization, to find out that Russia,
with its magnificent and complete resources, had no more reason for
war than the United States and was building a far finer social
order than that of the United States? And remember that we are not
here dealing with the Pope alone. We are considering the action of
a world-wide Black International that is saturated with skepticism
and hypocrisy and keener on dollars than harps.

     That is answer enough for most people but (we may go further.
We moderns -- by which I mean the majority of the men and women who
live in the cities of the world and have shed the limitations of
village-life -- will not have our affairs ruled or dictated by men,
however sincere they may be, who act on the myth that there is
another world that is far more important to men than this in which
we find ourselves. Whatever be the truth about religion this life
and the control of this life are secularized, We turn aside from
nothing fair and pleasant that it offers us because some of our 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               25

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

less-instructed neighbors think they see flames of hell reflected
from below the horizon or discern ghostly battlements of some weird
sort of heaven high above. And the clergy so far know this that
they plead that Atheism injures us in this life. We are always open
to argument but we resent lies. The clerical case for hatred of
Russia on human grounds is based upon a mass of demonstrable lies.
Its real basis is, as ever, the primary aim of the Black
International: wealth and power.



                           Chapter IV

                  HITLER'S MAGNIFICENT BLUNDER

     In September 1934 it was proposed to admit Soviet Russia to
the League of Nations. Nazi Germany, with Mein Kampf (the brigand's
guide) for its standard, had been retained in it. Japan had not
been expelled for its sordid violation of the League's principles.
Italy was an honored member although it made no secret of its
glorification of war and aggression. But the proposal to admit
Russia horrified and brought a shower of insults from the
representatives of various nations; and these outraged folk were
subjects of the Pope, and the Vatican warmly approved their
conduct.

     The attack on Russia was led by the Swiss Motta, a
representative of the nation that has always been loudest in praise
of peace -- which is very profitable at Geneva -- and is now making
much wealth by manufacturing the more delicate mechanisms of German
planes, tanks, and submarines and selling food to Germany while its
neighbors starve. At that time, perhaps, not even a member of the
middle-class that rules or misrules the Swiss would have made this
disgraceful attack on a progressive and peace-loving civilization
that could have taught Switzerland a higher idealism but Motta,
from the small Italian part of the country, was a zealous Catholic;
and that he acted for the Church is shown by the Vatican comment on
his vituperative speech in the Osservatore Romano (quoted with
approval in the British Catholic Universe, October 5, 1934):

     "Mr. Motta faced the problem of the admission of Russia with
a clarity of vision, a nobility of sentiment, and a rectitude of
Christian and civil conscience that finds a profound echo in the
hearts of all, for whom justice and right are still the unshakable
bases of civil society."

     Nobility of sentiment! The man was striking the first note of
that Hymn of Hate which the Vatican would soon urge upon Catholics
everywhere; the stupid chant that was to prevent, or help to
prevent, a cordial world-alliance against the bandits when the
crisis came, the chant that was pleasant music in the ears of
Hitler, Mussolini, and Matsuoka. The Vatican organ rejoiced that
ten states at Geneva opposed the admission of Russia or pointedly
abstained from voting for it, and we see Catholic influence in the
whole group. Holland voted against, and the press recorded that
this was due to Catholic influence in the cabinet. De Valera's
representative and Schuschnigg of Austria attacked Russia as 
virulently as Motta but did not vote.

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               26

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

     Two months before this Nazi Germany had shocked the world with
the mass-murder of prominent men, including Catholics, which is
called the Blood Purge. Did any Catholic orator or power, or the
Vatican, call it to account at the tribunal of civilization? Oh,
no; just then the Vatican was trying hard to persuade Hitler to
observe the Concordat and Catholic German bishops were flattering
him to his teeth. Two months after the Geneva meeting Japan,
probably encouraged by this outburst, threatened Russia, and there
was talk of war. What did Catholics say to that? Here is a
specimen, from the Catholic Times, November 3, 1934:

     "The Japanese are not anti-God. They have brought freedom from
persecution to our missionaries in Manchuria and adjacent parts of
China. They have consented to their settlers in Brazil being
instructed in the Catholic faith, and, while they dream of
influencing the world by the spread of Buddhism, they give freedom
of worship to their own Catholic nationals. In the event of a war
between Japan and Russia Catholics would sympathize with Japan, at
least in so far as religion is concerned, so let us beware of an
Anglo-American bloc against Japan involving us on the side of
Russia."

     There you have the pure Papal note, the accents of the Vatican
oracle Japan is "not anti-God" -- as a matter of fact, its ruling
class is almost as solidly Atheistic as the Russian -- while Russia
is, and Japan has made small concession's in the interest of the
Roman Church. So defend Japan and libel Russia in the Catholic
press of all lands. In that very year, 1934, Upton Close (J.W.
Hall) plainly exposed to America in his Challenge, with full
documentary evidence, that Japan was conquest-mad and had removed
the last shred of disguise from its greedy plan to monopolize
Eastern Asia and drive out all Christians, particularly Americans.
And because it hypocritically made promises to the Pope, Catholics
must be used as its agents in Britain and America to obscure the
mind of those countries in regard to its aims and divert them into
hatred of Russia.

     A few months later the same Catholic press went further in its
deadly work (Catholic Times, April, 1935):

     "Disarmament is dead . . . We can, nevertheless, have thirty
years' peace in Western Europe if France, Germany, Italy, and Great
Britain concentrate on Western Europe and its needs. We cannot have
agreement about Russia, since Germany has lifted the veil which
hides her ambitions. She wants the Ukraine. Few Catholics in this
country will approve a war against Russia, bad as her record is,
but fewer still will be happy if our alliances draw us into a war
in defense of the Godless. Russia must safeguard her own interests.
We are not concerned to uphold her. The wretched Franco-German
quarrel can be composed if France is willing to leave Russia to her
devices. If France insists on allying herself with the Soviet, she
should be told that Great Britain will have no part with her ... We
must choose between two evils, and Russia's possible loss of the
Ukraine is a much less evil than war-fires all over Europe, whilst
many would say that the undoing of Godless Sovietism is no evil at
all."



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               27

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

     As the British National Newspaper Library, the finest in
Europe, has been bombed and burned out of existence by the Germans,
I cannot verify the three quotations I have just given. I take them
from Miss E. Moore's No Friend of Democracy (1941) and I know the
author as a very careful and conscientious student of these
matters.

     This passage is a typical specimen of the slavery of the
Catholic press to the Vatican and its Policy of judging all
international events from the single viewpoint of the interest of
the Church while professing to consult the interest of the race.
The statement that few Catholic will approve of war against Russia
might seem to be written in defiance of the Pope's demand for a
crusade against that country, but the paper itself repeatedly
echoed the cry for "the extinction of Bolshevism," and the last
words of the above passage are plain enough. Not "many" but all
Catholics, as the writer knew, would rejoice at "the undoing of
Godless Sovietism." Notice, incidentally how carefully these
Catholic writers avoid the word Socialism. They know that large
numbers of Irish workers in Britain -- these workers of Irish birth
or descent are the main body of "English" Romanism -- belong to the
Labor Party, and this in rare moments of courage calls itself
Socialist.

     But the chief point is that this interpreter of Papal wishes
to the people of England emphatically advocates a national policy
which would be very acceptable to Hitler and was, in so far as it
was followed by Chamberlain and Halifax, most disastrous to Europe.
Russia was the one great European power that sincerely proposed
general disarmament. When its appeal was unheeded it was the one
power that began to devote a colossal part of its national
resources, which were very badly needed for social reconstruction
and education, to preparation for war. Thus in 1936, when British
statesmen were beginning to doubt the Baldwin policy of do-nothing,
Great Britain spent less than a fourth of its budget-revenue on
armaments and the United States one-tenth. But Soviet Russia set
aside one-fifth (20 billion out of 100 billion rubles) of its total
annual income -- for in that country the government-revenue
represents practically the whole of the wealth produced -- to
defense-measures, and it increased the sum every year until nearly
a third of the entire wealth produced in the country was devoted to
preparing for the barbarous and clearly-foreseen onslaught of
Nazism.

     What an ally Russia would have been from 1936 onward, and what
a different course of events in Europe might have followed! It must
be left to the historians of the future to say if a sincere and
dynamic alliance of Russia, Britain, France Czecho-Slovakia, and
Poland would not have intimidated Germany and Italy from that
piecemeal aggressive program upon which they entered. To me it
seems certain. But the Vatican and the Black International and the
Catholic press in every country did all in their power to prevent
it. Had the United States realized that Japan was one of the bandit
powers -- had the press freely and fully informed the people of the
open boast of Japanese politicians, military and naval men, and
editors, and told how highly colored models of the destruction of
the American fleet were exhibited to the public in Japanese cities 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               28

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

five or six years ago -- and joined the alliance, not in the
interest of Europe but its own interest, it probably never would
have known the vile treachery it has now experienced, for the
people themselves would have demanded adequate armament. But the
Vatican, the whole Roman Church, was opposed. There must be no
alliance with Bolshevism.

     Could there be a more terrible demonstration of the evil of
the sacerdotal viewpoint, the folly of listening to the Black
International on human affairs? At that time, 1936, the leading
powers were stirring from their criminal lethargy and beginning to
expand their armament-budgets. The League of Nations published a
statement that the world spent about $5,000,000,006 in that year on
armament, I have shown (What War and Militarism Cost) that it spent
something like $15,000,000,000, and one-third of this sum was,
according to the best experts, spent by Germany. What Japan and
Italy spent we do not know. No one trusts their figures. And the
two richest powers in the world, the two at which the great
conspiracy was chiefly aimed, America and Britain, spent (together)
one half the sum that Germany did. Russia alone spent something
like the sum that Germany did, though unlike Germany and Italy, it
did not starve or suppress its social services to find the money
but maintained and developed them.

     What guidance did the Papacy and its local agents give the
world? It bleated biennially about peace and between Christmas and
Easter cried for war on Communism in China, Spain, Mexico, and
Russia, above all Russia. It maintained its diplomatic alliance
with Germany, Italy, and Japan but spat poison whenever Russia was
mentioned. Its hierarchy flattered the ruler's of the three
aggressive, fully treacherous, and debauched bandit-states and told
the British and French people that they would have "thirty years
peace" if they would continue to outlaw Russia and trust Germany,
Italy, and Japan! What hilarious scenes there must have been behind
closed doors in Berlin, Rome, and Tokyo!

     Russia patiently, perhaps cynically, bore the hostility which
the Catholic Church and other interests fostered against it. It is
needless for me to observe that the Vatican was not the only
libellous enemy of Russia, but its share in the conspiracy is, on
account of its claim of lofty and disinterested idealism, in an
entirely different category from the share of bankers,
industrialists, and politicians. I am, however, not concerned with
finding adjectives to hurl at the Church of Rome. I am content to
establish facts. And if it is not a fact that Rome contributed
mightily until 1941 to that contempt and ostracism of Russia which
rendered vast service to the Axis and did incalculable harm to the
race we may as well doubt that the earth is a globe.

     So persistent and emphatic was this teaching of the Vatican,
especially during the fateful six or seven years before 1941, that
the Catholic world was paralyzed when at length Hitler made his
splendid blunder and attacked Russia. Less than a year earlier the
Papal Hymn of Hate had been more strident than ever. There were
many of us who, imperfectly informed by the press, felt our
admiration of Russia chilled when it seized part of Finland and the
little Baltic states. But we did not use the vituperative language 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               29

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

of the Pope's organ, the Osservatore Romano, the paper that had not
said a word about outrages like those in China, Abyssinia, Albania,
Czecho-Slovakia, Norway, Denmark, Yugo-Slavia, Greece, and, even
Belgium and France, for which even a liar could not plead, as we
now see Russia could truthfully plead, an essential piece of
defense against an openly-declared aggressor. The Vatican, in its
paper, not only completely ignored Russia's reasons but wallowed in
irony and invective as if this were the first aggression in modern
Europe.

     There is an amusing Paragraph in Stephen Graham's News Letter
(1940) reproducing the language of the Osservatore when the Russian
troops took back the Ukrainian and White Russian provinces. The
Papal organ shuddered to recall the atrocities committed by the
Russian troops in 1918. The soldiers were then Orthodox Catholics
almost to a man, and the Osservatore trembles to think what will
happen now that they are Atheists. And in the next paragraph
Stephen Graham, a strict member of the Church of England, gives
this report of an Englishman who Saw the Russian troops enter
Asthenia:

     "The fears proved to be groundless. The discipline is
extremely severe, and cases are known when soldiers were shot by
the political commissars for the slightest breach of discipline."

     The religious mind is weird and wonderful. Stephen Graham
actually goes on to reflect that this contrast of 1918 and 1940
suggests that "the atheist soldiers of 1918" were now extinct and
the Russians were generally Christians! Not for a moment do I
suggest that atheist soldiers never commit outrages, but what are
we to think of a Papal newspaper that sheds tears over the
fictitious outrage's of atheist soldiers -- I earlier quoted the
Vatican radio (January 22, 1940) bemoaning the "infamy of all
kinds" perpetrated by the Russian troops in Poland and has not a
word to say when we get positive Proof that the German soldiers
perpetrated real infamies and savagery in Russia?

     Here again it is not a question of the Pope or the Vatican
alone. The Black International everywhere repeated the cry of
Russian atrocities (made in Germany). In an address by Cardinal
Hinsely published recently in a work titled The Bond of Peace we
read of his "deep indignation" at "the enslavement of more than
eleven million inhabitants of the Polish state by Soviet Russia."
He talks of a "treacherous attack from behind" and the "Bolshevist
horror," and says that these "Poles," as he calls them, are
"reliably reported to be suffering from those persecutions which
had made our generation the era of unparalleled martyrdom." Perhaps
we should not expect a cardinal, even if he does pose as an oracle
on world-affairs, to know that Ukrainians and White Russians are
not Poles, but is he really ignorant that the "unparalleled
martyrdom" that these millions, of members of the Orthodox Church
suffered was inflicted by the Catholic Poles, had been going on for
20 years, and was at once stopped by the Russians?

     Now, as I have earlier quoted, there are signs of a most
brazen repudiation of the Hymn of Hate which the Papacy has had the
Catholic world chant from Montreal to Syria for the last six or 
seven years. Catholics boast that they are in a better position 

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               30

                 ATHEIST RUSSIA SHAKES THE WORLD

than Protestants in that they have one clear authoritative,
unwavering voice to guide them. It sounds like a dictatorship of
the Hitler sort. The truth is, however, that Rome speaks to them in
five or six different voices, and one can blandly repudiate the
other when it goes wrong. The only thing which they cannot
repudiate is the infallible or ex cathedra utterances of the Pope
-- but he never makes any. The Pope has several voices -- in
conversations, addresses, sermons, allocations, encyclicals, etc.
Then he has, in the second line a daily paper and a radio. In the
third line he has prelates and Catholic ambassadors, agents, etc.,
who can repeat conversations with him. On this third line we now
have Myron C. Taylor whispering that the Pope always recognized in
private a vast distinction between the naughtiness of the Nazis and
that of the Bolsheviks. Nazi wickedness is foul and unspeakable --
though he never cared to say so. Bolshevik wickedness is just
virtue without a Catholic foundation -- though he has a hundred
times called it foul and unspeakable.

     The latest audacity attributed to Mr. Taylor, solemnly cabled
to a London daily by its American correspondent, is this gem:

     "The general belief here is that important Washington-Vatican-
London-Moscow negotiations are in progress and that they are
directed towards the consolidation of the Christian front against
Nazism throughout the world."

     If we allow the Church of Rome to put over a maneuver of that
kind after its ten years of monstrous libel and vituperation of
Russia we have learned nothing by the terrible experience through
which we are passing. The Papacy could not hope to have any success
with it if it did not believe that we still have, unchanged, the
mentality with which we indolently contemplated the greediest and
most unscrupulous bandits of all time equipping themselves to loot
the world. There is no change in Russia. It is as atheistic as
ever. The change is in its critics. They have been compelled to
acknowledge that out of the horrible miseducated Tsarist Russia,
further demoralized by six years of war and two of terrible famine
and disease, the "Godless Bolsheviks," as the Catholic press still
called them only six month's ago, have created the greatest
civilization of our time; that the magnificent spirit of the
atheistic Russian people is in as stark a contrast as is
conceivable to the cowardice, evasiveness, tortuousness, and self-
seeking of the Black International that poisoned the world against
them.

                          ****     ****


    Reproducible Electronic Publishing can defeat censorship.

                          ****     ****

   The Bank of Wisdom is always looking for more of these old,
hidden, suppressed and forgotten books that contain needed facts
and information for today. If you have such books please contact
us, we need to give them back to America.

                          ****     ****

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               31



                        31 page printout

    Reproducible Electronic Publishing can defeat censorship.

          This file, its printout, or copies of either
          are to be copied and given away, but NOT sold.

          Bank of Wisdom, Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                          ****     ****

Edited by E. Haldeman-Julius

THE BLACK INTERNATIONAL                 No. 11

                 THE TOTALITARIAN CHURCH OF ROME

            ITS FUEHRER, ITS GAULEITER, ITS GESTAPO,
                        AND ITS MONEY-BOX

                        by Joseph McCabe

                  HALDEMAN-JULIUS PUBLICATIONS
                     GIRARD  -- : --  KANSAS

                          ****     ****

   CHAPTER

     I    The Holy Father ..................................... 3

    II    The Right Reverend Fathers ......................... 11

   III    The Common or Garden Fathers ....................... 19

    IV    The Money-Box ...................................... 24


                          ****     ****

                          INTRODUCTION

     During the past few years several estimable American writers
have claimed that the Roman Church is in sympathy with Fascism and
has itself a semi-Fascist complexion. In support of this charge
they have adduced such evidence that even Catholics have been
disturbed and divided. Apologists of the Jesuit type, who had
represented the Church as the faithful guardian, if not the mother,
of freedom and democracy, have excelled themselves in the
contortions of their craft. They had almost succeeded in persuading
America that the Statue of Liberty is a symbolic representation of
the Church. Less unscrupulous Catholic writers, or those who have
a higher appreciation of the intelligence of the American public,
have recognized that there is some truth in the charge and have
blamed the Pope, the Italian corporation that runs the Church, or
the local hierarchies of bishops.

     Most men vaguely feel that there is more than "some truth" in
the charge. It expresses a monstrous truth: the prostitution of
what they had been persuaded to accept as the most massive moral
power in the world. For no literary or journalistic sophistry, no
sonorous speech on the either, can blur the significance of the 

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               1

                 THE TOTALITARIAN CHURCH OF ROME

fact that in the mightiest struggle against evil that the planet
has seen for 15 centuries the Pope has been silent. Indeed, he was
worse than silent. In the old days a charge of treason was brought
against any man who "comforted or abetted" the king's enemies. In
that sense the Pope is a traitor to humanity. Neutrality in the
world at large, and especially in their own countries, was all the
help that the bandit-powers expected of the chief oracle of the
Church. It was enough if he allowed his local hierarchies of
archbishops and bishops and the priests they rigorously controlled
-- the Black International -- to assure their people that the orgy
of brutality, the satisfaction of a naked lust of power and wealth,
into which they had led their nations deserved their cordial
support and cooperation.

     And this effective support of a bestiality that will one day
astonish historians is not the whole guilt of the Church. In one
weak country after another that was marked out for enslavement to
the vile purposes of Hitler, priests prepared the way for the
invaders, and priests followed in their wake over the stricken
lands -- Spain, China, Abyssinia, Austria, Albania, Belgium.
France, Czecho-Slovakia, and Yugo-Slavia -- to raise the gold and
white banner of the Papacy, beside that of the pirates. Even in the
United States and the British Empire they tried, until each of the
Pope's three Allies in turn cynically dropped the mask and struck
at democracy, to lull suspicion and to paralyse by promoting hatred
of Russia and friendliness with or neutrality toward the enemies of
civilization.

     These facts may be discerned by any man on the face of
contemporary life, and in a series of ten booklets I have given the
details and the full evidence. Readers of my historical works (The
True Story of the Roman Church, The History of Morals, etc.) hardly
needed proof, They know that for many centuries the Roman Church
has maintained its power, and could not otherwise have survived in
an age of growing enlightenment, by allying itself with bloody and
corrupt secular powers. From about 1150, When Europe was fairly
awake after the heavy slumbers of the Dark Ages and perceived the
corruption of its Church, to 1550, when Protestants won the first
installment of freedom, several million rebels against Rome were
massacred or savagely executed. Even in the first half of the 19th
Century, when the nobler motto of the French Revolution had been
washed out with blood, the Church compassed the death of further
hundreds of thousands. Then the new humanitarian world of our time
-- the skeptical frivolous world whose sins the Church tearfully
deplores -- compelled it to suspend its policy. But that policy
remained and remains, on its statute book when it saw tens of
millions of adherents turning away from it in the new atmosphere of
freedom it waited impatiently for the opportunity to apply it once
more. The onset of the Axis beasts was its opportunity.

     But few know these things today. In the new and more liberal
world the Church at first professed repentance and conversion. But
as it grew in wealth and masses of voters it grew bolder, and at
length it acquired a control of public education that is second
only to that of the Nazis in thoroughness and mendacity. We shall
see the details of the plot. By the wealth it was able to use in
propaganda, by the intimidation of some and the Seduction of other 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               2

                 THE TOTALITARIAN CHURCH OF ROME

organs of instruction, even of some academic writers, it succeeded
in obliterating all traces of its grisly past and on imposing upon
America the idea that Roman Catholicism is a moral force that is
beautifully adapted to work with the spirit and institutions of
America. That also will some day astonish historians.

     Accustomed for years to have this idea of the Church impressed
upon him daily or weekly by his papers, breathed persuasively from
his radio, endorsed even by statesmen, the average American
hesitates when you say that it is rather an economic corporation
than a moral force and is the natural ally of Nazis and Fascists
because it has the same aims -- to increase its own power and
wealth -- and the same ruthlessness in pursuing its aim. So here I
propose to give a true and detailed description of the Roman Church
and contrast this with the utterly false representation of it in
American Catholic literature. As in the earlier series I intend to
rely on facts not rhetoric: and those facts will be given as far as
possible on Catholic authority, always on the best authorities.
Part of the hesitation of the average American is due to the fact
that Catholic writers have warned him that the Church is
misrepresented and libelled: that it has, in fact, "enemies," who
are driven to an insane hatred of it by its virtue and wisdom. It
is an old trick. You have heard that sort of thing from Goebbels
and Haw-Haw, have you not? You heard it from the Nazis until 1939,
from the Italians until 1941, from the Japs until 1942. But you
shall we the facts and judge for yourself.


                            Chapter I

                         THE HOLY FATHER

     I think it was Cardinal Hayes -- the priest who in 1921
ordered the New York Police (who obeyed) to stop an important
meeting on Birth Control in the Town Hall -- that claimed, and a
vast body of American Catholics applauded the claim, that it is the
sight of St. Patrick's Cathedral, not of the Statue of Liberty,
that, as a symbol of freedom, moistens the eyes of the refugee from
down-trodden Europe. Have Catholics no sense of humor? St.
Patrick's Cathedral, or the Roman Church in America which it
represents, suggests a body of about 35,000 priests who not only
rule the maids of 20,000,000 Americans, threatening them with the
horrors of an eternal concentration-camp if they rebel or read
anything that might excite a critical feeling, but they interfere
in the intimate details of the personal lives of these 20,000,000
Americans more truculently than the Gestapo meddle with such
matters in Germany. It suggests a body of 120 bishops and
archbishops who rule the priests as despotically as these rule the
people. And it points overseas to a Pope who controls the bishops
and archbishops as tyrannically as they rule their priests, and who
has on occasion treated, publicly, the whole body of American
prelates as arrogantly as some tactless lieutenant of police treats
his patrolmen.

     Let us begin with the Pope. He is called the Holy Father or
His Holiness or the Sovereign Pontiff because he is so holy and
removed from ordinary mortals that if you have only 10 or 20 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               3

                 THE TOTALITARIAN CHURCH OF ROME

dollars to spare when you get to Rome you must look at him from a
distance. If you can make it $50 or $100 you may kiss his slipper.
Make it $1,000 or so and you may kiss his ring. If you have a
million you may kiss almost anything.

     You do not, understand the Catholic protests. It is not his
person but in his character that the Pope is sacrosanct. He bears
a dignity that has been borne during nearly 1900 years by a long
line of austere Bishops of Rome, and he has been chosen for this
and endowed with a very special measure of "grace" by the Holy
Ghost. Even a politician may fittingly speak with reverence of such
a character or kiss his ring, while the heads of these upstart
Protestant Churches must groan with envy. Well, I know nothing
about Holy Ghosts but I know as much as any man living about these
Holy Fathers of the past. I have, in fact, written about them so
often that here I must be very summary. But if I dismiss them with
the bald remark that no other long-lived religion in history ever
had so disreputable a series of supreme leaders some of my readers,
more familiar with the conventional estimate of them, will find it
incredible, so let me repeat a few lines.

     How many Popes there have been we cannot say precisely, since
even Catholic writers differ about the number. The first three or
four on Catholic lists are more or less mythical, and there were
later ages when rivals for the wealthy bishopric got into such a
muddle of consecrations that it is difficult to say which was Pope
and which Anti-Pope. Let us say about 260. You will find that in
Catholic lists of these no less than 30 were Martyrs and 86 were
Saints. No wonder your Catholic neighbor is proud of his Popes! Yet
this statement, though repeated in the most important Catholic
works of reference, is so flagrantly untruthful as to the Martyrs
that the weightiest Catholic experts on such matters (Delehaye,
Ehrhard, Duchesne, etc.) admit that two Popes, at the most laid
down their lives for the faith. A dozen or so cheerfully laid down
the lives of their rivals or opponents.

     Two-third's of the 86 Saints are men about whose character we
have no evidence that would be regarded as reliable even by the
biographer of a statesman. The eulogies of these in the Catholic
Encyclopedia are based upon a Roman official calendar of the Popes
the first part of which is mainly fiction and upon tombstone
epitaphs like that which describes John XII, the most corrupt young
ruffian who ever wore the tiara, as "an ornament of the whole
world."

     Of the first 30 Popes, who all wear the official halo, the
character of only five is known to us. Two of these were Anti-Popes
who died in an odor not of sanctity but of sulphur, a third
(Victor) was rebuked by the whole Church for his arrogance and was
on peculiarly good terms with the Emperor's hottest concubine; the
fourth (Callistus) was an unscrupulous ex-slave adventurer (and we
know him best of all): the fifth (Damassus) fell foul even of the
civic police of Rome on a serious charge of moral turpitude. To sum
up this matter of early history, of which I give a full account
elsewhere, we do not know the character of at least 100 (which
includes nearly all the Martyrs and most of the Saints) of the 260
Popes; we know that more than half the remainder were addicted to 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               4

                 THE TOTALITARIAN CHURCH OF ROME

simony or protected clerical corruption; and we know that of the
remaining 160, with good evidence as to character, about 30 were
murderers, fornicators, sodomists, or variety-artists in crime. So
much for the fragrant tradition of holiness.

     Some of your professors of history say that I am just
muckraking when I recall these things, because the Roman Curia
reformed long ago. When? Certainly not at the Reformation, for the
line of Unholy Fathers, which had then already lasted a century,
was, with a few short intervals, prolonged for another century
after Luther; and the "greatest" Pope of the 18th Century, Benedict
XIV, was notorious in Europe for his love of spicy stories and used
expressions which the police would not permit me to translate.

     But did not the even more terrible losses of money and members
at the French Revolution sober the Papal Court? For a time, or as
long as the wintry winds blew. When the sun of corrupt despotism
shone again upon Europe the Popes and cardinals showed little
improvement. In my large History of the Popes (1939) I have
described the three Popes who adorned the Holy See in that Indian
Summer of the Middle Age's. Leo XII, a converted rake and elderly
invalid, was despised by all Rome and Italy. Pius VIII was a
paralyzed old man who literally dribbled at the mouth as they
wheeled him about the Vatican in his baby-carriage. Gregory XVI, a
notorious wine-bibber and lover of erotic gossip, "absorbed himself
in ignoble interests while the country groaned under misrule" (says
one of the chief Italian historians). The leading power of Europe
had, publicly, to warn these moral oracles of the race to put a
little common decency into their kingdom. Then there was the
"saintly" Pius IX, a miserable weakling who, after running away in
disguise from the revolutionary storm of 1848, let Cardinal
Antonelli (who was born a pauper and left $20,000,000 for his
bastard daughter and the priests to fight over) rule Italy on the
vicious old lines while he defied modern thought, discovered the
Immaculate Conception of Mary, and bullied the bishops into the
irony of declaring him infallible! The century finished with "the
great diplomatist" Leo XIII; and he was so successful in his
diplomacy that during his pontificate the Church lost some tens of
millions of members.

     Well, you may say, that must have taught the cardinal-electors
a lesson, and since 1900 they must have been very careful to choose
the really holiest and best candidates. They learned no lesson
whatever. Each of the recent Papal elections has been, as it always
was, preceded by intrigue and the clash of rival ambitions. Three
times since 1900 the voters have put at the head of their Church (a
world-wide business with an income of hundreds of millions of
dollars a year at its central office alone) a man who would have
failed to run a $3,000 store. I have just read fifteen Catholic
books -- British, French, Italian, and German -- on them and ought
to know them.

     The fourth, the present Pope, we will discuss shortly. Let us
first consider the Papal election (Conclave) in itself. This will
correct half the flatulent stuff you may have read in American
papers. The Catholic theory you probably know. Sixty or seventy
cardinals elect the Pope. They are locked and carpentered in a 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               5

                 THE TOTALITARIAN CHURCH OF ROME

special part of the Vatican palace, where each now has a suite of
rooms -- in the old days when they were all locked in a chapel day
and night for weeks the odor was not one of sanctity -- until one
of the rival candidates gets two-thirds of the vote's. There is
much praying to the Holy Ghost for guidance, but they still have to
be locked in and watched lest they consult profane persons outside.
It is to be inferred that the direction of the Holy Ghost is not in
good Latin because they rarely agree in less than three days.
Possibly it is not even then the supernatural guidance so much as
the rule that their diet shall be cut down from the fourth day that
hastens the decision.

     In practice the Conclave is much more human than the theory.
Ever since the Church of Rome became rich in the 4th Century there
has been a spirited struggle for the control of the treasury. As
early as 366 more than 160 of the supporters of the rival
candidates had to be buried, and as late as 1492 the "butcher's
bill" was more than 200. The struggle is now more refined; though
when the Pope says his first Mass he still has nobles at hand to
take the first sip of the wine and see that it has not been
poisoned.

     A feverish intrigue warms Rome before la Pope's death. Broadly
there are two schools of cardinals: the "zealots" -- think of the
hairy hill-men of Kentucky who roar out the hymn "Old-Fashioned
Religion" -- and the "political's" or practical men. There are
generally four or five cardinals who fancy their chances and carry
the bets of the Romans, and they canvass the voters of the rival
schools and let it be known that they are grateful to supporters.
Each party selects one champion, and they enter the Conclave with
the Holy Ghost on their lips and the name of a candidate in their
pockets. Those from France, Germany, Italy, or Spain may have also
instructions from their governments to keep out So-and-so at all
costs (the veto).

     They pray and talk for an hour or two and then take a vote
(written). The two favorites are found to have, perhaps, a third of
the votes each, and the nibbling at each other's parties and the
neutrals begins. There is still generally a deadlock, and they turn
to the string of "also ran." A few colorless outsiders are tried
until one gets the two-thirds vote. He is generally advanced in age
or an invalid so that the struggle may be resumed in a few years.
The lucky man who at last gets the required majority murmurs "I am
not worthy" and -- because a Pope Was once taken seriously when he
said this -- makes for the pontifical robes, which are waiting (in
three sizes). Then they take him out on the balcony to show to the
public. The historical record of these Conclaves by Petrucelli
della Gattina -- a good deal of it is translated in Miss V. Pirie's
Triple Crown (1935) -- beats the history of Tammany for clean fun.

     An Italian Catholic priest, G. Berthelet (Storia en
Rivilazioni sul Conclave, 1904) says of the election of the "great"
Leo XIII:

          "If Pius IX had foreseen the election of Leo XIII he
     would have excommunicated him, but if Leo XIII had foreseen
     that at his death the cardinals would vote for Giuseppe Sarto,
     he would have excommunicated the lot of them."

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               6

                 THE TOTALITARIAN CHURCH OF ROME

     Sarto, Archbishop of Venice, was a good old man of peasant
origin. His sister kept the village pub. He loved to talk broad
Venetian with a countryman and shock the more starchy cardinals.
But what else could the poor voters do? For years Cardinal
Rampolla, the ablest of them, a lean black-visaged lynx-eyed
schemer like the present Pope, had worked for the position. The
candidate of the zealots was Gatti, a somber ascetic man; and one
of the leading Roman cardinals, Vannutelli, who was well known to
have a mistress and children living not very far from the Vatican
-- one of the chief American consuls in Italy pointed out the house
to me in Rome in 1904 -- thought that he had a sporting chance and
carried many bets. But with so many of these prudish Americans and
British about in Rome nowadays only five dare vote for the gay
cardinal and he dropped out. Then, as that very sober and weighty
French newspaper Le Temps said in its account of the Conclave: "The
Holy, Ghost was clearly making for the French candidate (Rampolla)
but the Triplice (Triple Alliance) headed him off." The Austrian
cardinal, speaking for his government and that of Germany, said
that they would not tolerate the election of Rampolla, That
cardinal told them what he thought of so profane a maneuver but
"the German faction" stuck to their guns and Rampolla dropped out.
Then the genial Vannutelli proposed old Sarto who was turned 70 and
very easy-going. The Spanish cardinal had been instructed by his
government to oppose Sarto. but the warm language inspired by the
Austrian Veto intimidated him and the brother of the village pub-
owner (who was at once summoned to Rome and made comparatively
rich) put on the holy robe's.

     Catholic writers in America have denied that Austria was
allowed to exercise a veto but practically all the French and
Italian Catholic writers (Berthelet, Crispolati, etc.) affirm it.
I take the account of the Conclave from a biography of the Pope
(Pie X intime) by a high Papal official, the Count de Colleville,
who got it not only from "a great lady of the Austrian Court"
(obviously the Empress) but also from Cardinal Gibbons! The French
Cardinal Matthieu agrees in his account of the Conclave in the
(Catholic) Revue de Deux Mondes. It is beyond question. Vannutelli
and the Kaiser had a great deal more than the Holy Ghost to do with
the first Papal election of the 20th Century.

     As Pope Pius X (1903-14) he finely helped on that dissolution
of the Church which Leo XIII had begun. How in his fight against
Modernism he drove its few real scholars out of the. Church and set
up a new Inquisition: how he tried to drive out artists, literary
men, and ladies by forbidding modern music at the Sunday services;
and how he fell foul of France and Italy by insisting on his right
to examine the morals of their prelates we shall see later. He died
soon after the outbreak of war in 1914. They no longer knock the
Pope on the head with a little hammer to see if he is really dead
or feel the testicles of a new Pope to be sure that he is not a
woman in disguise, but the mood in which the cardinal-electors met
at Rome was as grim as ever.

     In 1914 the Vatican was "modernized." It had one telephone, of
primitive type, one creaky lift, four firemen (and odd-job men), no
automobile or vacuum cleaner. But it did know that there was a war
on, and the big question was whether they should have a Pope who 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               7

                 THE TOTALITARIAN CHURCH OF ROME

would help to bring Italy into the war or one who would keep it
neutral. Italy was a member of the Triple Alliance with Germany and
Austria, but they had not much to offer it, though they made
attractive offers privately to the Vatican, and they knew that it
was secretly negotiating with France and Britain for a higher
price. The Germans therefore hinted to the Holy Ghost that they
wanted a neutrality Pope, and they got one, a rank outsider. A
Strict Catholic writer, Crispolati, who was in the crowd in the
Piazza when Benedict XV, the new Pope, came out on the balcony,
says that there was "universal stupefaction." Baron Sonnino wrote
to a friend: "The Vatican is working with the German Centre and was
always an enemy of the Italian nation." You ought to try on an
Italian friend the little joke that "the Church never interferes in
polities."

     Like his predecessor, Benedict XV was a holy man -- that is to
say, he was elderly and never drank or swore -- but as the moral
ruler of the earth in a grave crisis he was about as useful as the
Grand Lama of Tibet. Europe was aflame with the first great war of
the century and, though this is not the place to assign the war-
guilt, no one imagines that the welter of blood and tears was just
due to an innocent misunderstanding. But Benedict XV flatly refused
to inquire who was guilty, "I am," he said in his Consistorial
Allocution on January 22, 1915, "commissioned by God to be his
chief interpreter." One would think that God would have had
something to say about a war that cost 10,000,000 lives and
$50,000,000,000 and led to a good deal of Atheism, but his "chief
interpreter" merely "denounced all injustice by whatever side it
may be committed" and said that he would not "involve the
pontifical authority in the controversies of the belligerents." He
was sure that it would be "clear to every unbiased thinker that in
this frightful conflict the Holy See, without failing to watch it
with close attention, is bound to a complete impartiality." The
Kaiser, being an unbiased man, heartily agreed with him. All that
he could hope for from Italy was neutrality. And the present Pope,
who was then Nuncio in Germany, was on good terms with the Kaiser.

     The great French scholar A. Loisy lashed him mercilessly (in
The War and Religion, 1915) for failing to distinguish between
impartiality and neutrality. The Italian's -- notably one Benito
Mussolini went further, They produced very good evidence that the
Pope maintained to treasonable correspondence with Germany through
the Austrian Church and very seriously tampered with the loyalty of
the Italian troops. But we have seen enough in our time of this
kind of conduct on the part of God's chief interpreter in a world-
crisis. As I said in the earlier books, the idea that there is
anything new in the recent policy of the Vatican or that you can
blame the present Pope for it is far astray.

     How Benedict completed the medieval work of his predecessor
and fastened upon the Catholic world a Code of Canon Law which
gives the lie to American apologists we shall see later. The Barque
of Peter emerged from the war "with overwheathered rib's and
tattered sails" and before it had time to recover it ran into the
hurricane, of Atheistic Communism. A frothy sea of blasphemy (from
both Fascists and Communists) confronted the Pope in Italy, and
devastating waves spread over Germany, France, Spain, and Spanish 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               8

                 THE TOTALITARIAN CHURCH OF ROME

America and Benedict succumbed (1922) and the cardinals met for a
grimmer fight -- I mean a more ardent supplication of the Holy
Ghost -- than ever. Ought they to maintain Benedict's policy of
spending millions of lire in an attempt to conciliate Russia? Ought
they to come to terms at last with the Italian throne, which was
tottering, and government and cooperate with them in strangling
Socialism? And so on.

     The treasury was almost empty. Catholic writers say that the
new Pope found only $55,000 in it, but they are rather ingenious
about these financial matters. Seldes reports their report of the
$55,000 but seems to forget that a few pages earlier he had said
that the new Pope set out at once upon a career of princely
generosity. "The day after his succession" he says (p. 250) "he
handed over 500,000 lire to the German cardinals, for their
compatriot victims of the sinking mark," and "some time after" he
gave the French clergy 1,000,000 lire; and in the same year (1922)
spent 2,500,000 lire on his Russian mission or enterprise. Some
wizard of finance! Catholic writers say that Benedict himself had
found an empty treasury, and even the expenses of the Conclave had
had to be met by a fat American cheque! We thank them for these
detail's but would further like to know how these things happened
when, as we shall see in the last chapter of this book, from 1900
onward the income of the Vatican had been at least $500,000,000 a
year!

     The same Italian writers tell us that Cardinal O'Connell had
hastened to this Conclave with instructions to probe the financial
mystery. The Knights of Columbus, we suppose, wanted to know where
their money went. But O'Connell reached Rome to learn that the
Conclave was over, and we gather that to express himself he helped
out his very elementary Italian with some ripe Irish-American.

     The voting had been fierce -- there were 14 scrutinies or
polls -- and out of the fight had emerged Achille Ratti, son of a
small silk-dealer of peasant origin. If his predecessor's
appearance on the balcony had been greeted with "universal
stupefaction" one wonders what sensation Pius XI created. He was an
obscure bookworm, a Papal librarian, and had for the last few years
been buried in Poland. Which did not prevent the American press
from hailing the result as a splendid choice and the new Pope as a
man of marvelous attainments -- he had even climbed the Alps -- and
character. He was quite moral, of course, and therefore in Catholic
language very holy, and of simple tastes. He set up a Spartan suite
of rooms in the Palace and brought his sister to clean out the
rascally valets, cooks, etc. He ordered that account-books (which
have never been seen) should be kept and is supposed to have
reformed the finances. The atmosphere of the Vatican City and Rome
was blue With naughty words.

     The chief point that concerns us here is that Pius XI is the
Pope who made the famous, or infamous, compact with Mussolini,
constructed an alliance of great cordiality with Japan, and helped
Hitler to power by ordering the German Church to drop its hostility
to the bunch of Nazi adventurers. He is the Pope who made Eugenio
Pacelli his Secretary of State and Signed every agreement that
Pacelli negotiated between 1930 and 1939. It was he who blessed the


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               9

                 THE TOTALITARIAN CHURCH OF ROME

outrages of the Germans and Italians in Spain and sent a Papal
banner to float beside the blood-stained rag of Franco; he who sat
with sealed lips in the Vatican while the whole Italian Church
cheered the savage attack on Abyssinia and called it a crusade for
God and civilization: he who patted Cardinal Innitzer on the back
for betraying Austria to Hitler and who approved the Catholic
intrigues which ruined Czecho-Slovakia: he who roused the Catholic
world -- indeed the whole world as far as he could reach it -- to
hatred of Russia and a demand for the extinction of Socialism. A
very Holy Father. When he died the Catholic press glowed with pride
in his fragrant memory and his services to the race, and the
American papers generally dug out their stereotyped articles about
"the venerable head of the Great Church" and his beneficent moral
influence.

     The cardinal-electors at once, and with less intrigue and
dispute than usual appointed as his successor the man who, as
Secretary of State, had emphatically carried out if not inspired,
his policy of alliance, for the benefit of the Church, with the
three great powers whom the world now execrates and loathes. The
Catholic press hailed him ecstatically. The American section of it
assured the world, on the authority of their cardinals (who had
worked generously for his election) and archbishops, that he was
quite American in his enthusiasm for peace, freedom and democracy.
But I have told the whole story in the preceding series of booklets
and will not return to it. Form your own judgment. You have all the
material. Ask yourself this question: Did or did not the American,
British, and French cardinals who were his chief champions in the
conflict, and the archbishops and bishops whom they are supposed to
consult, understand the policy that Pius XI and Pacelli has openly
pursued for ten years? Choose your alternative -- and your language
about it.

     This little sketch of the Conclaves of the last few decades
will give you a better idea of the Papacy as it is today than you
will learn from a hundred editorials and magazine articles. There
is no need to dig up the odoriferous bodies of the Popes of the
Dark Age or the Middle Age. I really do not care two pins about
the question how many children Innocent VIII, Alexander VI,
Julius II or Paul III had or just how many Popes were sodomists
or murderers. I recall these things only when I find so many
other writers, even professors, pretending that the Papacy
promoted civilization in Europe or Catholic writers telling
monstrous untruths about the Middle Ages. After all, these Papal
sinners, however incongruous it may be to find them in a Holy See
in which the Holy Ghost takes so special an interest, did not do
much harm to the race. Most of the real evil was done by the
Saints (Leo I, Gregory I, Gregory VII, Innocent III, etc.). But a
vast amount of harm has been done by these stodgy bourgeois Popes
of modern times and the political "cardinals who guided their
hands."

     That they are "chosen by the Holy Ghost" you now see to be
the emptiest of bunk. They are not even chosen because they are
the wisest and best men available. The present Pope, it is true,
was one of the ablest of the cardinal-voters, but he was not
chosen on account of his linguistic ability and his experience 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               10

                 THE TOTALITARIAN CHURCH OF ROME

from much traveling. He was elected because the Italian cardinals
believed that Germany, Italy, and Japan would win in the
impending conflict and would carry out their promises to the
Church and destroy Socialism. A Papal election is like any other,
except that in a political election the man with the largest
number of votes wins and in the Papal election the voting must be
repeated until one cardinal gets two-thirds of the votes. It is
gloriously prolific of intrigue but above all hovers the golden
rule: More power and wealth for the Church.

     Well, this is the Pope when you strip him of all
propagandist "properties," as the theatrical folk say. That he is
infallible is, of course, even on Catholic principles a poor
joke. Since it was declared in 1870, after a prolonged and bitter
struggle with a large part of the bishops, that he is infallible
if he speaks in certain conditions every Pope has been very
careful in his utterances to avoid those conditions. Is he an
autocrat? Very decidedly on Catholic theory. He need not consult
anybody, though in practice he consults his Secretary of State
and other cardinals when he is preparing an important message. He
can depose any prelate or cardinal, but in practice if an Italian
is troublesome to the Pope and his friends he is buried in a
diplomatic appointment far away. The Italian cardinals are the
Pope's cabinet and he frequently discusses matters with them and
with visiting cardinals and archbishop's but they have no power
to modify what he propose's to do. He is an autocrat, a dictator,
a Fuhrer or Duce, in just the same sense as Hitler or Mussolini.
But just as these find it expedient to discuss affairs with the
leaders of their respective parties, so the Pope must consult the
sentiments of the higher clergy of Italy. The cardinals find it
safe to elect a mediocrity sometime's because they know that he
will not run the Church. They and the leading Italian prelates
do. That is the next important point to appreciate.


                           Chapter II

                   THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHERS

     American and British Catholics show a tendency in recent
years to want to get rid of the title "Roman" of which they were
once so proud. In order to be able to call for the suppression in
America of Communism and socialism -- Atheism would be the next
victim -- without (they say) incurring the charge of violating
the grand American principle of freedom some sophists started the
slogan that these things are "un-American." It is slowly dawning
upon the minds of many that a religion which calls itself Roman
Catholicism does not sound pure American, so the word quietly
passes round to cut out the "Roman." Examine your new
Encyclopedia Americana -- of which, if you will pardon me saying
so, American culture ought to be ashamed -- in the writing of
which Catholics have played as lamentable a part as in the
writing of the last edition of the Encyclopedia Britannica.

     It is ridiculous to drop the word, and it becomes quite
funny when you occasionally find an apologist going on to say
that if the Vatican ever draws anything at variance with the 
American spirit and Constitution they will cut the cable and 

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               11

                 THE TOTALITARIAN CHURCH OF ROME

become simply the American Catholic Church. Seeing that Catholic
means "universal" the thing is stupid. It is just a loud way of
saying that, of course, Rome would never do anything of the kind.
Their Church is essentially Roman: not in the sense that Peter
founded it at Rome, which is false, or merely in the sense that
Rome is the connecting link of the various bodies of its members
in most countries of the world, but because Rome rules it as
surely as the Boston clique, rules Christian Science everywhere.

     If the American hierarchy were conceivably to defy the Pope
they would have to repudiate a large part of their theology and
the vast literature of sermons and articles on their superiority
to other sects in that they possess a Holy Father, an
international and infallible leader who is inspired above all
other mortals to rule the world. All the talk about the grandeurs
of the Vatican would have to be disowned, and it would have to be
admitted that the billions of dollars sent to it were wasted on a
bunch of hypocritical Italians. Even if it were pretended that
the American Church remained part of the Catholic Church -- it
could not, as I said, be Catholic (universal) yet purely American
-- it would find itself repudiated with horror by every other
branch of the Church, for schism is in Catholic theology as
sinful as heresy. It would lose millions of adherents and its
treasury would be terribly reduced.

     You may therefore regard as sheer nonsense and quite
insincere any talk of American apologists about defying the Pope.
Every American bishop and most priests know that all such
attempts -- there was a notable attempt (Old Catholicism) in
Germany after Pius IX bullied the bishops into declaring him
infallible -- has dismally failed and could not possibly succeed
in our time. But few realize to what an extent the Italians
control the Church and have a huge financial interest in
maintaining this control.

     Here let me, once for all, say a word about what some folk
call "the good side" of Catholicism. I have met many of these
'liberal' writers and read most of them, and I find that they
have one thing in common: they do not know the Church of Rome.
Often they take up this attitude for social or political reasons,
and they protect themselves in it by refusing to read critical
works or full statements of facts like mine. They give their
readers an impression of the Catholic period in European history,
the Middle Ages, which is a confused and superficial jumble of
lovely cathedrals and teeming universities, chivalrous knights
and holy monks and is false to the extent of four-fifths. They
will not read accounts of the real character of the time. Their
idea of the Church today is an equally superficial maundering
about venerable heads, sagacity of the age-old Vatican, deeply
religious priests, and virtuous laity: which again is a mixture
of one part of truth and four of lying. They are in large part
responsible for that false idea of Rome which has enabled it to
help the enemies of civilization during ten of the most fateful
years in history. So let me say that, while I know much better
than they how many decent Popes there were and what proportion of
the bishops, priests, and monks are really and consistently
religious -- not more than one in ten -- I am, as a conscientious
writer with a social outlook, concerned only with the general 

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               12

                 THE TOTALITARIAN CHURCH OF ROME

features of the Church and think it a service to my fellows to
tell them the truths which are usually from not very respectable
motive's which masquerade as liberalism, so generally and so
scandalously suppressed.

     One of these truths is that in one of its most important
aspects the Church of Rome is an economic corporation, the Black
International, for collecting and drafting hundreds of millions
of dollars every year to Rome. I have described how, and on what
grounds, the Popes are elected. Originally, and all through the
Dark Ages, the Pope was elected, publicly and orally, by the
priests and people of Rome. This led, as I said, to vicious
fights when the See became rich, and the "cardinal" (or
principal) clergy of Rome used this pretext to secure a monopoly
of the election. The Popes had now crushed Roman democracy and
deceived the people everywhere into submission to their semi-
magical powers. It was a very profitable monopoly. The people
were still allowed to loot the palace and treasury of the dead
Pope but the cardinals from that date expected the man they
elected to show his gratitude and in Renaissance days the shower
of favors amounted to millions -- and a candidate found it easier
to bribe or persuade a handful of cardinal's than a mob. In time
the Catholic monarchs forced the Papacy to grant the red hat to
one or more distinguished prelates in their own countries and the
"sacred college of cardinals" became. international. But the
Italians retained, and still retain, a monopoly of the power to
elect a Pope.

     There are supposed to be 70 cardinals. At present there are
55, and 29 of these are Italians. They always have an absolute
majority; and this is easily secured because they elect, the Pope
and he, in consultation with them, creates new cardinals as the
old die off. Foreign cardinals fume and demand a larger
representation in the "sacred college." The United States has
about 15,000,000 Catholics and only two cardinals. Italy has
probably about 20,000,000 genuine Catholics and 29 cardinals. The
Italians have the further advantage of being united and close
neighbors while the foreign cardinals are scattered and often,
like their nations, bitterly hostile to each other. There are,
for instance, two American, two British (including the Canadian),
three Vichy French, three Fascist Spanish, and three Nazis. Thus
the Papal autocracy is a lucrative monopoly of the Italians.

     It is part of the Catholic idea that is foisted upon the
public by the press, radio, cinema, subsidized books, etc., that
these "Princes of the Church," as they are called, stand next to
the Pope in austerity of character and superiority of intellect.
After what I have said about recent Popes you will realize that
they need not be on a very high level to deserve that
description. But, as we saw, this virtue-and-wisdom idea is a bit
of sheer propaganda. Vannutelli was the second most important
cardinal in Rome -- after the Secretary of State -- and his
children must have been proud of him. A Hungarian cardinal at one
of the recent Conclaves refused to enter the concentration-camp
because the food served was not good enough. Most of them are
quite human; and as to intelligence, remember that Sarto (Pius X)



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               13

                 THE TOTALITARIAN CHURCH OF ROME

and Della Chiesa (Benedict XV) became Popes. They are selected
for all sorts of reasons, but in Italy mostly because they are
sound on the Italian policy of monopolizing power and being
always on the side of the big battalions.

     Most of them are comfortable men who are not so much
interested in power as in their bank-accounts, About half a
century ago a book on the Roman system (Les Congregations
romaines, 1890) was published by a Vatican official, a strict
Catholic, F. Grimaldi, in which -- and it is so accurate that it
was put on the Index -- the author said that any candidate for
the cardinal's hat had to have $5,000 for expenses, gifts, etc.,
and the cost would now be very much greater. But the prize is
well worth it. In the last chapter of this book we will consider
the very peculiar financial system, or lack of system, of the
Vatican, but no one really knows what any high ecclesiastic gets.
Pius XI declared in one of his speeches that the sum he got,
after two or three years haggling, from Mussolini as the price of
his silence was fixed by him as low as he could possibly make it
because the Italians (who would have to produce it) were his
children. It was more than $90,000,000, and each cardinal got his
income doubled at once. Seldes says that it is now about $5,000 a
year.

     In Italy a tax-free income of $5,000 a year is equivalent to
a $20,000 a year income in America, but it is far higher. The
Italian cardinals are the Pope's cabinet, and they get the plums
in the way of special appointments, commissions, expenses, etc.
We shall see that most of the work of the crowd of officials on
the Vatican City is done through 13 departments of state (or
Congregations) besides various tribunals and other fixtures. I
will describe them in discussing finance. These Congregations,
which grant dispensation's, absolutions, solutions, etc., in the
name of the Pope, are the main channels of the Vatican's vast
income, and it would be interesting to know how much of the
stream of gold sticks to the fingers of the cardinals who preside
over them. You need not take it literally when you read that some
service rendered at the Vatican was "gratuitous." Its officials
could give lessons to the photographer who enlarges your
photograph "for nothing" and then charge& "$5 or $10 for the
frame. In the account of these Congregations in the Catholic
Encyclopedia you read that a cardinal presides over each. In the
much more reliable and semi-official annual Orbis Catholicus we
are told that the number of cardinals at the head of each is "not
generally less than ten or more than 35"; and do not imagine them
rushing to the job from the breakfast-table of a morning.
Millions of lire reach these Congregations, which are housed in a
massive palace, every month from all parts of the Catholic world,
though Italy itself is far from being the best customer.

     But there are other sources of income. Here is one of which
you will not read mention anywhere. In 1935 Sir Thomas More,
Henry VIII's favorite wit until they quarreled and "the author of
more puns than all the rest of the saints put together, was
"canonized." The touching final ceremony was filmed, and you may
have seen the serried ranks of the crimson-caped Italian
cardinals who had gathered in the sanctuary to do honor to 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               14

                 THE TOTALITARIAN CHURCH OF ROME

Britain. A London priest in close touch with the authorities told
a friend of mine that each of these cardinals had demanded a fee
of $100 (English money) for that single appearance. The whole
business cost English Catholics, to the disgust of their
leader's, about $85,000 in all.

     Such opportunities, or far more profitable ones, are common
enough, and we may be sure that cardinals who, through the Pope,
control an income of hundreds of millions of lire do not treat
themselves shabbily. But no one outside the inner circle knows
the facts. Writers on "the secrets of the Vatican" confess that
the secret of revenue and expenditure is impenetrable. Something
like 5,000 officials, monks, prelates, priests, impoverished
nobles, and grafters dip into the stream of gold but each knows
little more than his own business. The clerical officials of the
Vatican publicity-bureau are as venal as any in the world but
they do not know this secret.

     That, then, is the central mechanism of the Italian Church
for controlling and exploiting the Catholic world. It is a pretty
system. The cardinals, reaching a deadlock in the fight of rival
schools, elect a glorified peasant, a bookworm, or a simple-
minded old prelate on whom they can rely for loyalty to the
Italian policy. As the older cardinals die out they discuss with
the Pope in their cabinet-meetings whom they will choose to fill
the vacant places. Foreigners are little represented at these
discussions and they would be in a hopeless minority if they
happened to be in Rome so the Italians settle which of their
archbishop's can safely be admitted to the inner circle. Italy
owns the Church. So it was in the days of Dante six centuries
ago: so it is in our age of wireless and wonder-planes.

     And the Italians are determined that so it shall remain.
These American cardinals who come along with blustering
instructions from the Knights of Columbus about finance are a
pain in the neck to the Italians. They have to be humored, though
they sometimes complain of meeting discourtesy at the Vatican,
because they supply so very large a part of the Papal income, but
their idea of applying in so sacred a world the profane maxim
that taxation without adequate representation is tyranny is very
unsound Catholicism. It is true that their Italian is too
elementary to enable them to argue with the suave and foxy Roman
cardinals, but they can now draw upon their colleges and churches
in Rome.

     The Italians, as I showed in the earlier books, have for 20
or 30 years met this democratic menace by extending the Church in
lands in which, they think, the people have not been bitten by
the bug of democracy. The British Catholic Teeling's very
temperate book, The Pope in Politics, takes its text from that
truth. The Church must be extended eastward as rapidly as
possible -- hence, as I explained, the stupid wooing of Russia
and Turkey, the chronic hostility to and readiness to injure
Greece, and the general support of the Eastern policy of the Axis
-- and the so-called Latin nations, thoroughly purged of modern
and democratic ideas by Petain, Franco, Salazar, and the South
American dictators, are to form a grand Catholic Fascist League.


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               15

                 THE TOTALITARIAN CHURCH OF ROME

     In all this the Vatican is not merely acting on a long out-
dated psychology. If one point is more humorous than another in
the conventional idea of the Vatican it is the claim that it has
"a profound and penetrating knowledge of human nature." The only
psychology it knows is a medieval corruption of that of Aristotle
which is about as valuable as a second-rate novelist's psychology
of woman. Scientific psychologists put it in the ash-can nearly a
century ago. These Vatican officials who cherish the theory that
orientals are "naturally submissive," that Russians and Slavs.
are "peaceful and docile" until they are confused by Bolshevik
agitators, and that the Latin-American folk have much the same
"nature," proceed on a racial psychology that belongs to the last
century. There is no "human nature," much less a permanent type
of national character, in modern psychology. There is only human
behavior, and you do not need any science to tell you how
rapidly, even in national masses, it can change. Russia, Germany,
and Italy in their different ways have illustrated the truth so
plainly in the last 20 years that one would have thought that
even an Italian priest could see it. One suspects, in fact, that
the Papal bureaucrats have their eye more on the knout in the
hands of the leaders of these "submissive" peoples than on their
"nature." The Italian priests are not really on the mental level
of Petain for simplicity.

     But there is a second reason, not suspected by most writers
on the subject. Why the Vatican looks to these new extensions of
its power to counterbalance the detested democratic element which
the Americans. are bringing into the Church. Catholic provinces
in which there is not yet a fully constituted hierarchy are ruled
directly from Rome. They are foreign missions and are under the
Congregation of propaganda and its cardinals. It is an
arrangement that is more profitable to the Vatican -- it cuts out
the middle-men so to say -- and gives it a better chance to make
the Italian influence felt. The Vatican is, therefore, in no
hurry to establish new hierarchies. Even Briton remained under 
the Propaganda Congregation until well into the 19th century. No
doubt, the new bodies of subjects of the Pope who are, it is
thought, to be won from the Orthodox Churches in the East are to
be kept as long as possible under Italian representatives of the
Roman caucus.

     When the Catholic body in any country becomes large and rich
it presses for the establishment of a hierarchy of bishops under
one or more archbishops (or "chief" bishops). The early Church
had, in my opinion, bishops ("oversees" or superintendents)
before it had priests, at least in Rome, the sacerdotal idea
being developed late in the 2nd Century. However that may be,
bishops and archbishops, the Right Reverend Fathers and
Lordships, soon became indispensable elements of the clerical
structure that Rome was fabricating. The Church has today about
1,000 bishops, more than a quarter of whom are in the golden
land, Italy, and in one way or other share the financial
sunshine. A moral history of them would be even more unsavory
than that of the Popes and cardinals. The rich bishoprics and
archbishoprics of the medieval Church, which were often little
princedoms until the end of the feudal system, were obvious
prizes for the younger sons and bastards of princes and nobles, 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               16

                 THE TOTALITARIAN CHURCH OF ROME

and a remarkable procession of them crossed the stage of European
history. Down to the year of the Revolution the great French
prelates took not the least trouble to conceal their vices, and
there was considerable freedom in Italy, Austria, Spain,
Portugal, and South America. One must not refuse a measure of
sympathy to these rich clerics who found their world rudely torn
apart, their wines spilled and their mistresses scattered, by the
new species of men know as "the Reds."

     With the growth of the deplorable "materialism of the 19th
Century" and the increase of Protestant or skeptical travelers in
Catholic countries the episcopal and archiepiscopal epicure's
were painfully compelled to part with the more graceful of the
luxuries of their palaces, though the tactless zeal of the late
Pope discovered scandals in Italy as recently as ten years ago.
Today in every country where Fascism has not extinguished liberty
the archbishop's must devote themselves soberly to the
supervising of a group of dioceses. They are the Gauleiter, the
regional representatives of the Fuhrer, in the Nazi-Papal system,
and their loyalty to the central caucus at Rome is easily secured
today. Time after time in history a national hierarchy, rooted in
the soil and intimately connected with the king and his
interests, have defied Rome and threatened to cut the cable.
Cardinal Richelieu seriously considered making the French Church
independent of Rome, and in Germany and Austria the hierarchy
have often defied, sometimes excommunicated, the Pope. In Italy
bishops and archbishops have cut up his troops . . .

     That, as I have explained, cannot happen in modern times.
One of the differences between the course of sacred and that of
profane history since the French Revolution, a difference that
few historians care to notice, is that while secular monarchs
have ceased to be absolute or autocratic the Popes became more
and more absolute until, in the full 19th Century, the bishops
granted that claim of infallibility which Popes had failed to win
from the Church in earlier ages! But the Church is also more
sensitive about scandal. The gay medieval spirit, when a man
jovially told his neighbor that he "drank like a Pope" yet
contributed generously to Rome, has departed from Catholicism. A
page of medieval history which lingers in my memory tells how
when a certain pope was threatened (for the thousandth time) a
robust archbishop hastened to see him and assure him that his
(the archbishop's) five sons would fight for him. Gone are the
snows of yesteryear. But the Vatican has various ways of securing
the loyalty of the Gauleiter.

     In the first place they are all appointed by Rome. Some of
the sternest struggles with rulers that the Vatican has waged
have been over this appointment of prelates. Rivers of blood
flowed over it in medieval Italy, and only recently Franco and
the Pope quarreled for a year about it. The Church never yields
any country or ruler more than the right to submit the names of a
few eligible men to the Vatican, which usually chooses one but
may refuse all. The qualifications for the office are very
varied. I remember that in my clerical days a British episcopal
See fell vacant and I heard my senior cynically repeat that the
essential qualification was to have a private income of $20,000 a


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               17

                 THE TOTALITARIAN CHURCH OF ROME

year. The main qualification, are skill in collecting money and
loyalty to the Italian system. The Vatican makes careful inquiry
on these points and listens very seriously to suspicions of
discontent. Fifty years ago I found it still a vivid tradition in
higher Church circles in London that Cardinal Manning repeatedly
and very truculently, on the occasion of his visits to Rome,
denounced Cardinal Newman for disloyalty.

     Every archbishop and bishop must pay a periodical visit to
Rome and give the Secretary of State a close account of his work.
He would find it difficult to conceal any rebellious sentiment
from Italians whose scent of intrigue has been sharpened by
decades of practice; and they have a most courteous way of making
him feel that he is rather an inferior member of the Church. In
addition to this, Apostolic Delegates, Apostolic Visitors, etc.
-- lucrative little jobs for the Italians -- are sent
occasionally to every province of the Church to make more
searching inquiries. The Vatican has several classes of spies,
from the Nuncios or formal ambassadors who settle in the capitals
of various countries and cardinals who are sent abroad to preside
at Congresses and other special functions to minor but much more
inquisitive officials. Rebellious tendencies are toned down
without any scandal, which is the bugbear of the higher clergy,
the worst offense in the ecclesiastical code. Local prelates are
advised when and how to interfere with priests who stand out from
the common rut and attract public attention by political work.
Some ask in America why Rome was not informed long ago about the
campaign of Father Coughlin, as the bishops say that the Vatican
alone could silence him. You may be sure that the Vatican knows
almost as much about Coughlin as you do.

     Here, again, is an instructive bit of experience. When I,
already a priest and a monk, went to Louvain University to study
philosophy and oriental languages I became fairly intimate with
my professor, Mercier, then the leading authority on philosophy
in the; Church and later known all over the world as Cardinal
Mercier. I was compelled to live in the monastery, but Mercier
invited me to live at his house, and I at least spent many hours
there with him. Having been commended to him by a very liberal
priest in London, I had his entire confidence and heard him use
very disdainful language about such vital doctrines as eternal
punishment. He was an advanced Modernist. Years later he became a
cardinal and whew the ignorant Pope Pius X made his truculent
attack on Modernism (or scholarship) in the Catholic Church I
read in Catholic literature that Mercier warmly supported him.
"Let there be no innovations," he said, on the most approved
Italian lines. And after his death I had to read (in Prati's
Popes and Cardinals of Modem Times, 1926) that he was "one of the
noblest characters the world has ever seen." Mercier had
described me in a long review of one of my books as a fallen
angel, an outcast.

     Finally, here is an illustration from public life. American
prelates and priests began in the last century to claim that
their Church was distinctively American, and so it was useless to
quote against it what Catholics were saying or doing in other
parts of the world. The Vatican sent an Apostolic Delegate to 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               18

                 THE TOTALITARIAN CHURCH OF ROME

study the matter and, as it had not yet realized the full
financial potentialities of the New World, it took normal action.
In a published letter to Cardinal Gibbons in 1899 the Pope
sternly, in fact disdainfully, condemned what he called
"Americanism"; by which he meant precisely that modification of
the Roman teaching which apologists now put before the public as
Catholic social and political ethic's. Later Popes were more
sensitive of American generosity, and the apologists are now
permitted to say that these principles are not only sound
American but sound Roman, because Jefferson a dogmatic
Materialist and his blasphemers friend John Adams learned them
from Catholic theologians!


                           Chapter III

                  THE COMMON OR GARDEN FATHERS

     Do I, in speaking of the Fuhrer and the Gauleiters of the
Roman Church, suggest that it has some resemblance in structure
to that most despised and most hated corporation, the Nazi Party?
Certainly, a very close resemblance. It is an autocracy tempered
with an informal council of consultants. Its center in Rome
corresponds closely to the Nazi center in Berlin. Its regional
rulers are representatives of the Fuhrer and subject to his
control. Its aim is the same and the acquisition of power and
money -- and it clothes the aim in a profession of concern for
civilization just as the Nazi leaders clothe theirs. It is just
as convinced as they that the education of its subjects must be
monopolistic and not suffer the voice of a critic to be heard. It
realizes the hypnotic value of an incessantly repeated phrase
like "God Bless our Pope" (Heil Hitler) and "the Holy Father" and
an untroubled outpour of eulogies of "our Holy Faith." And it has
its Gestapo and other agents scattered over every country which
it has conquered or hopes to conquer: quarter of a million
priests, a vast army of monks and nuns, and an immense body of
"technical experts" (journalists, teachers, writers, paid agents,
organizers, etc.).

     The cream of this vast international service consists of the
body of priests and dignitaries (canons, monsignori, etc.) below
the level of bishops: the Gestapo men. How they work, and how
here again there is a close resemblance to Nazi methods -- except
that the priests use threats of hell instead of Dachau -- we
shall consider thoroughly in the next book, but we must have a
short chapter on them here to complete our study of the structure
of the Church.

     How many there are in the world I do not find stated in any
official or semi-official publication. One Catholic writer says
100,000, but there are more than that number in France, Germany,
and the United States, which contain only one-fifth of the
world's total of Catholics. They are very unevenly distributed.
France, which has less than 10,000,000 Catholics, and probably
not more than 6,000,000, has 51,000 priests: Brazil, which claims
46,000,000 Catholics, has only 4,000. Eire has 5,000 and Holland
2,000 to the same number of people. If you have a scientific eye 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               19

                 THE TOTALITARIAN CHURCH OF ROME

you will notice a relation between the number of priests and the
amount of money extractable or the comfort of the priests' life.
Brazil is, taking it by and large, a land of paupers, whole vast
areas of Indian-populated country being almost abandoned. France,
though the number of its Catholics has been reduced to about one-
fifth of the population since 1870, is a land of sleek priests. A
witty French work describes a father who has paid for a clerical
education for his son and has just seen him ordained saying to
him: "Now settle down, my boy, and get fat." Eire has much the
same conditions. America feeds its 35,000 priests generously. Let
us say that there seems to be, roundly, about quarter of a
million priests serving the interests of the Italian caucus all
over the world,

     Each of these priests is, like the Gestapo men, a pocket
edition of the head Dictator. Once a week he become's an oracle,
on any subject on which he chooses to orate, and even the best
educated man in the church must not frown at the insipidity of
his sermon or the absurdity of his statements. Periodically he
preaches on the priesthood, and he sternly insists that
Catholic's must look to the character (in the ecclesiastical
sense) not the person of a priest. He is miles removed from them
because he can by a few words convert a bit of paste into the
living body of Jesus and can forgive sins or drive out devils. He
does not mind much if some of the richer members, with higher
education, decline to take this literally provided they never
breathe their heresy except to each other. He learns about them
from their wives. He can enter any Catholic home he likes any
afternoon and demand an answer to any question he likes. If there
are no children or only one or two he must know if the smallness
of the family is a work of nature or of art. If the children do
not attend his school he peremptorily orders an immediate change.
If a daughter goes out with a non-Catholic young man he breaks
the friendship or exacts a secret promise that she will leave her
husband no peace unless all the children become Catholics. If he
sees a book written by a critic of the Church he puts it on the
fire. He must know if the husband goes to church and confession
regularly or ever attends anti-Catholic meetings; and he may
suggest an intimate treatment for bringing him to heel. . . .

     But we shall see all this in the next book. Where the
priests differ from the Gestapo is in their infinite variety. In
theory and in the opinion of many there is still an analogy. All
the Gestapo men are sadists: all the priests are deeply
religious, very wise or sagacious, and uniformly of a beautiful
nature, like the priests of whom you read in Catholic novels or
see in the films which the Church persuades Hollywood
occasionally that it is worth while producing. In the flesh
priests differ just like any other body of men. There are even
total abstainers amongst them, though drink is the chief
alleviation of their condition at which the Church connives.
Catholics who live in parishes which are served by priests who
belong to certain religious orders will tell you how it is
impossible to persuade one of them to take a drink. They do not
know that in order to edify the people, such priests are very
sternly forbidden by their rulers to drink outside their
monastery and in their own parish; but they may have their 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               20

                 THE TOTALITARIAN CHURCH OF ROME

revenge when they get home. Other priests use their judgment.
Visiting an Irish or otherwise jovial family that likes the
"Father O'Flynn" type of priest they will drink or joke freely,
yet carry a long face to the next house.

     In short, the most drastic element of their training is to
accommodate their external behavior to their environment. The
non-Catholic who assures you that he has met priests in the homes
of Catholic friends and that it is the sheerest nonsense to
compare these frank, genial, so very human personalities to the
sour and vicious Gestapo men is foolish. The priest is in such
circumstances just as compelled to display a professional
geniality and broadmindedness as the Gestapo man is bound by his
office to be mean and overbearing. That priest, we shall see,
believes in the right of "mental reservation" -- saying one thing
with your lips and another in your mind -- is intolerant of other
creeds to his marrow, and has a more despotic authority over his
own people than the President of the United States.

     Catholics themselves do not know the character of their
priests. I have in my travels met many ex-priests and compared
notes with them. There was a general agreement that the majority
of priests are skeptical in some degree, often completely
skeptical, but their people never suspect it. I lived from the
age of five to fifteen under the shadow of a monastery. My
childish impression of the priests, whom, as the star pupil of
their school, I knew well, are, of course, worthless, but I knew
what my elders thought of them. They were all believed to be well
above the average in character. They induced me to join the
fraternity, and ten years later I lived with them and really knew
them. Not one was above the average in character, and several
were far below it. One who had in my earlier years been regarded
by all the Catholics of the district as particularly holy and
ascetic, turned out to be an incurable dipsomaniac, an appalling
liar, and woman-chaser and had, though this step is taken with
extreme reluctance on account of the possibility of its becoming
known, to be expelled from the brotherhood. Another I found to be
quite well known to his colleagues as a seducer of girls. A
third, a robust man of considerable talent, became half-insane
through brooding over sex and the eccentric acts to which this
led in his relation's with women. A fourth, my immediate superior
for years though I had not the least suspicion of his character
and state of mind, bolted with all the money in the monastery and
was traced to a low cabaret in Brussels. Nearly all drank
generously and were of a poor type of character.

     The newest approach to a generalization on "the morals of
the priests" that I have been able to reach is that a small
minority -- hardly one in ten -- has the type of character and
the sincerity of religious feeling which are demanded by their
vows and position and are attributed to them by the laity. The
remainder vary as much as any other group of men, at least half
of them, probably much more, being unfaithful to their vows, and
just fitting as much comfort as they can into the dreary life to
which they committed themselves when they were boys or youths. It
matters little how many priests misconduct themselves with their
servantq or lady-parishioners or make periodical trips in semi-


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               21

                 THE TOTALITARIAN CHURCH OF ROME

disguise to the nearest city. The main point is that the
overwhelming majority are not in the least "spiritual," to use
the favorite word of those who take transcendental views on these
matters. "Holy" Orders are just part of the hypnotic phraseology,
constantly repeated -- like the excellence of soap or soup that
stamps itself on the mind by lavish advertising -- which the
Church has found so useful. Holy Father, Holy Mother the Church,
Holy Land, Holy Faith, and so on. Since, other Churches do not
use this phraseology the Catholic gets a naive idea that his own
Church is admitted to be unique and therefore not bound by the
ordinary laws of honesty and mutual tolerance. It is unique only
in its scheme of self-laudation.

     The mediocrity of character of the vast majority of the
priests is easily understood. They are mostly men who, if they
did not wear costumes that are supposed to indicate a moral
superiority to the rest of us and if they did not arrogate the
right to a moral censorship of the lives, tastes, and
entertainments of the whole community, not merely of Catholics,
would pass as ordinary decent citizens. The system has in some
respects distorted their character, and their official status
makes them hypocritical. An Irishman, whom I know well and upon
whose word I can entirely rely, told me that he and two others
entered into conversation with a priest in a train in western
Ireland. The conversation gradually warmed and in the end, as
they approached a town, the priest invited them to join him in
visiting a lady with two daughters in the town and promised very
intimate entertainment. If that priest had been talking to an
English traveler his language would have been very edifying. As a
rule they need not practice much hypocrisy in Eire, Italy, Spain,
etc. -- I have even in Melbourne seen a young Irish priest in a
hotel leave the bar and, with a wink at the barmaid, who followed
him, go upstairs -- and even in some American cities, such as
Chicago and Boston, they have now such power as to ignore the
fear of scandal. In Spain until a few years ago priests
advertised in the papers for "companions," and in South America
they quite openly frequented brothel's.

     The situation is, as I said, intelligible. It is part of the
Catholic myth that priests are men who in their youth felt a
supernatural "vocation" to serve the altar; though in recent
years I have seen clerical advertisements in Australian papers
advising youths that the "vocation" will probably come after they
have entered upon ecclesiastical studies. The wintry atmosphere
of the modern world (from the Church angle) in such countries as
America and Britain stunts the annual crop of vocations, and what
usually happens is that parish priests or teachers mark out boys
as suitable, and the great advantages and privilege's of the
priesthood -- it is the same for monks and nuns -- are impressed
upon them. Having had the charge of such boys for years, in
addition to my knowledge of my fellow-students, I am familiar
with their psychology. Becoming priests means rising to a level
of comfort and especially of social prestige which they would
otherwise never attain. Possibly in later adolescence the
unnaturalness of the celibate life will be felt by them but even
if they are already irrevocably pledged, it is too late. A
Catholic youth requires rare moral courage to go back to his 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               22

                 THE TOTALITARIAN CHURCH OF ROME

home-district as one who drew back from "the call." In any case
the social prestige of the priestly order, the flattering
attentions of a peculiarly large circle of girls and women, the
chances of becoming a notable preacher or rising to a higher
dignity, still beckon. Where the age-old experience of the Roman
Church does tell is in devising effective systems of this kind.

     Moral mediocrity is in most cases doubled with intellectual
mediocrity. The boys attracted today are as a rule from the
farming, the immigrant, or some similar class. Such bodies of
priests as the Jesuits, who have higher colleges, are supposed to
select their brightest pupils and carefully inspire them with a
"vocation." The utter mediocrity of Jesuit literature in modern
times, especially when we reflect that they have more leisure
than most priests, shows how false this is. The general level of
intelligence of a class of ecclesiastical students is poor. And
the system of education is calculated to restrain the development
of the more intelligent. The year or two of preparatory study,
mostly of Latin and Greek, leaves them with no idea of a real
classical education. Not one priest in hundreds could read
Tacitus or Martial in Latin, and still less keep up their very
elementary knowledge of Greek. After that the years of study are
stupefying. Two years, perhaps, are devoted to studying a system
of philosophy which is beneath the contempt of philosophers (and
quickly forgotten) and three or four to systems of moral and
dogmatic theology and spiritual study on Fundamentalist lines. In
the rare seminaries in which science or general history is taught
it is ruthlessly emasculated. My professor of philosophy
illustrated a point by alleging the mystery of the distance of
the moon from the earth, and I contracted my first suspicion of
rebelliousness by speaking out and telling him the distance.

     The great majority forget even these acquirements as rapidly
as the youth or girl forgets the lessons of the primary and the
high school. They are abysmally ignorant from the viewpoint of
modern culture. Their reading, when they read at all, is
generally confined to articles in Catholic weeklies and monthlies
and the cheaper Catholic literature. They protest that no book-
learning is required for the discharge of their functions.
Theoretically the Catholic youth who has felt doubt from
conversation with non-Catholics or from indiscreet and forbidden
reading is supposed to lay the matter before the priest in
confessing his sins. In practice he looks for an apologetic work
or consults the Catholic Encyclopedia. He might as well consult a
professional politician, even on points of ecclesiastical
history, as a priest. Few priests have even an elementary
knowledge of science, philosophy, economics, literature, or art.
The innumerable writers of the Church have, they say, relieved
them of responsibility in this respect, and the daily round of
their functions requires only a minimum of professional
knowledge. This life is really mechanical: the daily celebration
of Mass (which it would take you an hour to read and they run
through in 25 minutes), recital of their office (which is
gabbled, with lips only, at more than 200 words a minute and
without any attention to the meaning), the pleasant visits to the
brighter homes of parishioners in the afternoon, and the services
or society-meetings after dinner. The priest of the Catholic 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               23

                 THE TOTALITARIAN CHURCH OF ROME

novel, or of the novelist who aims to conciliate Catholics -- the
wise, placid, far-seeing priest who drops such pearls of wisdom
-- is a myth. Few priests could read an article in a scientific,
philosophical, or economic journal. Mercier once lent me, when I
was studying at Louvain, Paul Janet's work Les causm finales. The
friars, who regarded with deep suspicion mt intimacy with the
future cardinal, reported me for reading works on necromancy or
spiritualism or something of that kind. Mereier spoke about them
to me exactly as I am speaking here.

     These are the men who, like the Gestapo in Germany, and most
of Europe, make the final application of the Italian system to
the millions of the Pope's subjects. They differ, naturally, in
different countries. A priest in rural Brazil, Portugal, or
Poland, who tells his people that practically all Britons and
Americans, being Protestant, are damned or a priest in Eire who
tells a young man, with a loud crack of the clerical whip, that
he will not marry him or let any other priest marry him for less
than $40, would not prosper in Boston, or San Francisco. But we
shall see enough of this, and of the prudent adaptation of
Catholic teaching in countries in which the Church is in a
minority, in later books. It is enough here that this is the
machinery by means of which a broad Papal policy, such as the
libelling of Russia and Communism, is stamped upon the minds of
millions. With the priests, as I said, cooperate vast crowds of
monks, nuns, religious brothers, journalists, teachers, etc., but
these general remarks will suffice for my present purpose.


                           Chapter IV

                          THE MONEY-BOX

     It is more important to understand, as far as one can, the
financial system of the Church of Rome. I have said that the
analogy to the Nazi party is completed by an identity of aim: the
protection or augmentation of the power and Wealth of the Black
International. Naturally the primary and general aim is wealth. A
certain number of the abler members of the clerical army have
that peculiar itching of the mind, so morbidly developed in
Hitler and Mussolini and the Japanese leaders, which is called
the Lust for power, but I leave that to psycho-analysts and
concentrate on the acquisition of wealth.

     I have already met the charge that in presenting the Roman
Church in this light, as an economic corporation that is
primarily concerned to keep up and enlarge the numbers of its
contributing members, I am ignoring nine-tenths of the life of
the Church and fastening upon a purely formal and superficial
resemblance to secular corporations. The man who, usually with an
air of superiority, charges me with this, really confirms the
analogy I have traced between the Roman Church and the Nazi
party, for what he says for the Roman clergy is much the same as
what we heard from the Nazi leaders a few years ago when the
secret of their wealth was made public. Their primary aim, they
said, indignantly, was not to acquire wealth either for
themselves or the German people but to impress upon the world a 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               24

                 THE TOTALITARIAN CHURCH OF ROME

new ideology which would inspire a greater civilization and, by
conquest, ensure that the exceptionally gifted German race should
have the power to protest it. Your amiable professor or literary
man retorts that they were lying by the clock. But all he knows
about the primary aim of the priests, prelates, and popes of the
Roman Church comes, similarly, from themselves, and he knows
nothing about their character except what they tell him. He
refuses to read the Works in which I give hundreds of
illustrations of their untruthfulness, insincerity, or duplicity
in propaganda. He refuses to believe the assurance of men like
myself who have lived intimately among them for years that their
body is saturated with skepticism and very poor in what he calls
 spirituality.

     Another type of critic asks me why I fasten on the Roman
clergy when all clerical corporations are in the same position.
But the reason ought to be clear. I have proved that the three
bandit-nations had very grave encouragement and assistance from
the Black International in preparing and launching upon the world
their avalanche of brutal fury and greed. That sets Roman far
apart from other Churches. You may heavily blame the Lutheran
Church in Germany for supporting the Nazis or the Buddhist
priests in Japan for helping the treacherous and callous leaders
of their country, but the guilt of this is immeasurably less than
the evil done by the world-wide and hypocritical action of the
Black International.

     There is a further difference. Numbers of Protestant
ministers have told me not merely that they themselves reject
Christian dogmas but that such rejection is very widespread in
their body. They claim that for all that they are "doing good"
and will remain in their Churches. But skepticism about the
ideology which they preach is bound to be far more widespread in
the Roman clergy, and the unnatural life to which the Church
binds them gives it a more cynical tinge. What, in a word, is the
essence of the Catholic claim to such superiority over other
Churches that you must excuse their arrogance and intolerance?
They have had to abandon the idea, which they still held a
generation ago, that "outside the ark" (their Church) there was
no possibility of salvation, but they insist that their Church,
with its "real presence" of Christ in the consecrated wafer, its
priests who can absolve from sin and its punishment, its "Holy
Orders" and infallible Pope, makes it far easier and surer to
attain salvation. From the viewpoint of the modern educated man
or woman, Theist or Atheist, that is a crass and childish
superstition. It belongs essentially to the Middle Ages and
easily breaks down even in the mind of priests who read nothing
more stimulating to the intelligence than Catholic weeklies and
detective novels.

     Professional men are, from the economist's angle, men who
sell services to the community just as others sell commodities.
Priests sell their services in this sense. They are an economic
corporation like lawyers or doctors. But there is the mighty
difference that, while all the world acknowledges the value of
other professional services, at least four-fifths of the educated
world regards with disdain those services which the Catholic 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               25

                 THE TOTALITARIAN CHURCH OF ROME

Church claims to be peculiar to itself. The readiness of so many
to say that we must look to their moral and social service is due
either to lack of will or of leisure to make an exact study of
such services, in which case the scientific ideal should compel
them to be silent, or to even less respectable motives. I have
shown repeatedly in detailed an of every aspect of social conduct
-- and later books of this series will consider some -- that the
Church renders no such service to civilization; and the preceding
ten books have shown that its disservice immensely outweighs any
such service that it could plausibly claim. It sells to
200,000,000 folk services that are in the conviction of the
modern world as fraudulent as those of any charlatan, and the
price it gets for its services will astonish the reader. We ought
here to take into account the funded wealth as well as the annual
income of the Black International or -- since the laity have no
share whatever in the wealth -- of the clergy, higher and lower,
in every country as well as in Rome. A large work would be
required to cover that field, and we must here restrict ourselves
to the income of the Vatican or the Pope and his Italian
satellites and servants. The reader should, however, not forget
that this Roman annual income is only a tithe of what the
200,000,000 Catholics pay for the services of their clergy. The
Church in the United States is computed to have a wealth of
$4,000,000,000 and an income, of at least $800,000,000, a large
part of which is annually invested and adds to the mountain of
wealth. The Church in Germany, or (mainly) in those provinces of
Germany which did not leave the Church at the Reformation, was
equally wealthy until the Nazis began to take over schools and
institutions. The Church in Spain is estimated to have had until
recent years more than two-thirds of all the money and one-third
of all the real estate in the country. This is an estimate by a
Catholic Spanish bishop. Another Catholic writer illustrated its
wealth by saying that $7,500,000 worth of candles and incense
were burned in Spanish churches every year, and that the jewels
on one statue of the Virgin at Toledo were worth $100,000.
American writers computed that before the Philippines were taken
over the Church squeezed 113,000,000 pesetas a year out of the
poor people.

     Here, however, I have space only to give some idea of the
income of the Papacy, which more closely concerns us. Every
writer who touches on the subject observes that the total and the
details are kept a strict secret by the Vatican officials. Pius
XI is admired because he introduced expert accountants into the
Vatican. As I said, the attitude to finance was to that time so
slovenly and the graft so general that although in recent decades
the income has been hundreds of millions of dollars a year the
treasury was empty at the death of Pius X and almost empty at the
death of Benedict XV. Admiration is hardly the sentiment with
which in such circumstances we regard the action of Pius XI, but
whatever improvement there has been the secrecy is still strictly
maintained. It is, in fact, very doubtful if the Vatican draws
up, even for the information of the Pope and the Secretary of
State alone, a balance-sheet which shows the total annual income.




                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               26

                 THE TOTALITARIAN CHURCH OF ROME

     In an earlier booklet I said that G. Seldes (The Vatican),
who has an interesting chapter on Vatican finance, puts the total
at a billion dollars. His book is so favorable to Catholicism and
won such recommendation from American Catholics that I concluded,
until I read his more recent and more critical work, The Catholic
Crisis, that he was probably a member of the Church and therefore
not likely to exaggerate its income. Almost the only thing which
the Black International and its admirers do not exaggerate is the
revenue of the Church. But hiving had occasion to consult my
notes again I found that I misquoted Seldes. He did not say a
billion dollars but a billion lire (and a lire at par is little
over one-fifth of a dollar).

     I ought therefore for once to apologize for an inaccuracy
but there are circumstances which dispense me. Seldes stated on
the age of his work that the "historical section" of it is based
a work by two French Catholics, London and Pichon, Le Vatican et
le monde moderne. But his book is a translation not merely of the
historical part but of the whole of the French work, though with
very large and useful additions. The paragraph from which I
quoted is a literal translation from the French -- but with an
alteration of four letters which makes a mountainous difference.
London and Pichon do not say that the total annual income of the
Vatican must be "a billion lire" but "billions of lire." When you
are thinking in billions it really makes a material difference
whether you say "one" or "several." The common-sense
interpretation of the expression used by the French Catholic
experts is that annual income of the Vatican (several billion
lire) must be between half a billion and a billion dollars.

     On one other point in this connection I should warn the
reader that Seldes's book, valuable as it is, is misleading. He
enlarges on the severe loss to the Papal treasury (which he
exaggerates) when Italy took from it the Papal State's or the
Pope's kingdom in Central Italy. It is not very clear how they
yielded something between five and ten million dollars a year to
the Pope when they were miserably poor, administered (by priests)
with gross inefficiency and graft, and loaded with debt. However
the point is that the loans were loans to the Papal Court, raised
from extortionate bankers not for expenditure on the provinces
but on the Court; and the Italian government, though by 50 to 1
the inhabitants voted for removal from the Pope's rule, and
conquerors are scarcely in the habit of giving compensation even
for provinces taken against the will of the inhabitants, at once
offered the Pope the compensation of 3,250,000 lire a year.
Seldes does not clearly explain this but quotes (p. 247) the
rather dishonest and certainly stupid complaint of Cardinal
Vaughan: "The robber's refused to take over the burdens with the
stolen provinces." The provinces eagerly joined the new kingdom
of Italy: the debts were on the security of the provinces but not
for, use in them: and the robbers offered such compensation or
price for the provinces that the accumulated interest in 1929,
which was handed over to the Papacy, amounted to more than
$90,000,000!





                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               27

                 THE TOTALITARIAN CHURCH OF ROME

     This vast sum, which was really the price of the Pope's
silence when Mussolini thought fit to begin his brutal
aggressions, ought to be today one of the chief sources of the 
Vatican's income. Nearly half of it was given in bonds of the
Italian, State, and though the Italians themselves lose a
colossal sum by their loans to the practically bankrupt state,
one suspects that Mussolini finds it prudent to pay the Pope's
share of the interest. It certainly gives the Papacy a very acute
interest in the maintenance of Fascism, for if Socialists
obtained power they would assuredly repudiate the dishonorable
bargain. The remainder of the bribe was paid in cash. Part of it
is still in bullion in the Vatican treasury, and a very large
part was invested by the Papacy in French and Hungarian railways:
which gave the Papacy a stake in the stability of those countries
or a lively concern to see them paralyze Socialism and Communism.
I have been informed from America that the Papacy gets its agents
to invest the greater part in the richer interest-bearing
enterprises of the States -- the depression was not yet in sight
-- and that it was buried under the snow-storm of the fall of
that year (1929). I offer no guarantee whatever of the soundness
of this statement.

     Since we know nothing about those new account-books of the
Vatican we can see only that this sum ought to yield at least
$5,000,000 a year and of itself makes the Pope a multi-
millionaire. But the Vatican, which is not subject to common
human laws, can have its cake and eat it too. As soon as the
first of the Papal provinces were taken from it by the Italian
armies and the emphatic. provinces vote of the inhabitants the
Pope sent out an agonizing call to the whole Catholic world.
Catholics must save him from beggary -- you may remember that it
was at this time that Cardinal Antonelli, born in a peasant's
hut, amassed a fortune of $20,000,000 -- by contributing to an
annual collection called Peter's Pence. In the Middle Ages this
had meant a fixe Papal tax of a penny (then a quite respectable
coin) on every Catholic hearth in the world, but it was now a
voluntary collection to which rich and poor contributed according
to their means. Within a few years it was yielding $4,000,000 a
year. The latest figures I find are that it was yielding about
$5,000,000 before the depression of 1929 began, and Catholics
boast that, whoever starved in the new era, the present to the
Papacy was maintained.

     The main source of income is, however, the price of the
administrative work of the Vatican, just as the payment for the
services of the cardinals, priests, and officials employed in it
is the chief item of expenditure. The work is, as I said, divided
between 13 Congregations, which correspond to Departments of
State in a secular government, and few people have an idea of its
volume. In any large and international business it is a fixed
principle that the supreme or control office shall not be
bothered with queries and solutions of difficulties that are
within the competence of branch officials. In the Roman Church it
is rather the reverse. All over the world bishops and priests
have to encourage appeals to Rome, even on such matters as
whether Mrs. Smith in some small town in America may send her
children in exceptional circumstances to a National School and 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               28

                 THE TOTALITARIAN CHURCH OF ROME

whether her daughter may marry a second or third cousin or a
Protestant. Marriage, in fact, which the Church professes to have
raised to the rank of a sacrament in the interest of
civilization, is one of the most lucrative interests of the Black
International. It is hedged about with restrictions from which a
dispensation must be obtained from Rome. The Catholic must not
marry one who is related to him or her, either by blood or
marriage within the fourth degree. A dispensation is needed to
marry a non-Catholic, and disputes arise about the validity of
the marriage as its consummation which may lead to causes
celebres, costing thousands of dollars, at the Roman Tribunals.
The amazing procedure in this connection will have to be
considered at length in a later book, but the non-Catholic who
imagines that matrimony is a simple matter in the Roman Church --
that the priest links you to a man or woman you remain linked for
life -- is very far astray. And this is only one source of the
petitions and cases that are submitted daily to the "Sacred
Congregationi" of Cardinals it Rome.

     A conservative detailed account of their work will be found
in the Catholic Encyclopedia, and it is hardly necessary to warn
the reader that when a service is described as gratuitous you
understand the word as certain eminent amateurs of sport or
aristocratic dames who give their names to charities understand
it. There are always "expenses." When Count Marconi got a
declaration of the nullity of his marriage (which was blessed by
the Holy Ghost with several children) to Miss O'Brien (19 years
earlier) so that he could marry a Catholic countess and merely
paid "the expenses" one wonders whether they happened to be less
than $50,000. I have spoken of the canonization of Sir Thomas
More when the British Catholics were presented with a bill for
expenses (including a massive gold chalice as souvenir for the
Pope) amounting to $85,000. Such plums are rare, but the great
volume of ordinary work and consultation by priests all over the
world carries with it a very large total sum of money.

     There is no need here to list the Congregations and analyze
their work. First of them is the Holy Office, once the dreaded
Inquisition and now a very tame bureau of sleek priests for
granting, for a consideration, certain classes of matrimonial
dispensations. The second, the Congregation of the Consistory,
primarily has to organize the Papal election (Consistory) but
this would give the cardinals -- and official's too meager a
share of the Papal income, and they now arrange the formation of
new dioceses and the difficulties of bishop's in their dioceses,
receive reports of the titled spies whom the Vatican sends about
the world, grant (sell) ecclesiastical distinctions, etc. The
Congregation of the Sacraments has a very busy time hearing
doubts and disputes about the administration of the seven
sacraments, especially (except in regard to mixed marriages)
matrimony, all over the world. A bishop cannot allow priests to
say Mass outside the prescribed hours or places or make other
alterations of the ritual without its permission. The
Congregation of the Council takes over the innumerable questions
that are grouped under "discipline," both of the secular clergy
and the laity; granting, dispensations from or modifications of
the law of fasting and abstinence, hearing cases of 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               29

                 THE TOTALITARIAN CHURCH OF ROME

irregularities, and so on; while the next Congregation on the
list discharges this enormous task in regard to monks and nuns.
-- The Congregation of Propaganda takes care of all missionary
fields and administers all Catholic provinces where there is not
yet a hierarchy (which it is in no hurry to establish) and the
Congregation of the Index helps out its shrinking income by now
attending to questions of liturgy and canonization. These are
only half the departments, and behind them are three Tribunals
(or lucrative courts of appeal for the wealthy) and various
"Offices," but what I have said will suffice to give some idea of
the immense volume of work. All experts agree that these furnish
the largest element of the Papal income.

     Probably the next largest element consists of gifts to the
Pope or St. Peters. A Catholic -- if I ever have such a reader --
would wince when I rather flippantly described on an earlier page
the usual tariff for the privilege of "seeing the Pope," but,
except that non-Catholics of distinction are at times admitted to
interviews without fee for political reasons, this is the
recognized practice. Seldes gives a dollar each as the
contribution of the poorer American pilgrims who stand in a
bunch, open-mouthed, at some distance from the Pope. All are
"expected" to pay, and as pilgrims from France, Spain, Italy,
etc., in the summer often run to 1,000 or 2,000 the total sum is
large -- what rich American and British Catholics who "talk" to
the Pope pay one must imagine. In one year, Seldes says, the
Knights of Columbus gave the Pope $250,000, and in 1925 the Pope
received, at the prescribed financial distances, 1,250,000
Catholic pilgrims.

     Another source of income that is not generally known is from
certain Papal Domains and royalty rights. The Vatican takes a
large (unknown) percentage of the immense profits of the
fraudulent shrine of the Virgin at Lourdes, and of the still more
grossly fraudulent shrine at Loreto in Italy, where Catholics
still pay vast sums to see the actual house, transported to Italy
by angels, in which Mary lived at Nazareth 1900 years ago. Until
a few years ago it had a similar royalty right on the enormous
sale of indulgences in Spain and Spanish America, and no small
part of its sacred fury against the Reds is due to the fact that
the Socialists and Rationalists drove this traffic off the
market. Whether Franco has restored it I cannot ascertain. It
used to yield millions of pesetas yearly.

     The sale of titles is another rich source of revenue. It
would, I suppose, be libel to suggest that the hundreds or so
wealthy Catholics who bear Papal titles (countess, marquis,
Marchioness, knight, etc.) in democratic America paid cash for
them, but on the general question the French and Italian Catholic
writers are candid. Jean de Bonnfon has published a piquant work
(La menagerie du Vatican, 1906) in which he gives biographical
details of the 300 French men and women -- the large-minded
Vatican grants a (rich) woman a title in her own right -- in
France who hold these titles. From a Roman source he quotes that
the (pre-war) tariff was 100,000 lire for the rank of duke,
25,000 for a count, 12,000 for a baron, and so on.



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               30

                 THE TOTALITARIAN CHURCH OF ROME

     These are only a few of the more regular and familiar
sources of revenue. Seldes gives a further illustration for which
I must acknowledge my indebtedness to him. Mussolini's bargain
with the Pope in 1929 included the right of the Vatican to have
its own postage stamps, and the Director of the Papal Posts made
a profit on them of $5,000,000 in a few months; and he had
thoughtfully put a date on them so that a new issue was required.
Seldes observed that collectors and dealers bought them up
everywhere. He, does not seem to know that the faithful were
encouraged to buy them all over the world as souvenirs of the
restoration of the Papacy to royal power.

     But there are other vast and steady sources of income of
which Seldes knows nothing. Under their shirts or chemises (or
whatever it is that women wear next to the skin) most Catholics
wear, and all are urged to wear, holy medals, scapulars, Agnus
Deis, or other charms (against the devil, accident, disease,
etc.) which have been "blessed by the Pope." All that the Pope
has done, of course, was to wag his fingers at a room-full of
them, but the simple-minded Catholic is content. This traffic is
enormous. Less in volume but on a much higher scale, is the trade
in relics. Every new altar that is consecrated must (on Vatican
orders) contain a relic of a saint, and the Vatican has to supply
it. Naturally it charges only for the metal case and the voucher
of authenticity, but you would be surprised at the price of metal
and parchment in Rome. They are just as spurious as they were in
the Middle Ages. "In fact, the Vatican. manufactures relics
today. In my clerical days I found a Jesuit selling to pious
ladies in London in a house-to-house visitation bits of the
cassock of a canonized priest (whose biographer boasted that one
ragged cassock had sufficed him all his life). When I pointed out
the fraud he laughingly explained that a bale of cloth had
touched the genuine relics. Then the Vatican has its share in the
price of Masses. Quarter of a million are said daily and some
Catholic pays for each. In America the minimum tariff is a
dollar, and the rich give large sums. Rich churches with too many
commissions farm them out to countries with a cheaper tariff. And
from all presbyters that have a little spare fat, all nunneries
and monasteries, the surplus goes, through the bishops, to Rome..

     Do you begin to see why I call the Black International an
economic corporation aiming at wealth and power? Why it hates
Russia and Atheism? Why it forms alliances with any criminals who
promise to destroy Socialism? Why, in short, it played the part I
have described in the monstrous world-plot against humanity and
civilization?

                          ****     ****

    Reproducible Electronic Publishing can defeat censorship.

   The Bank of Wisdom is always looking for more of these old,
hidden, suppressed and forgotten books that contain needed facts
and information for today. If you have such books please contact
us, we need to give them back to America.

                          ****     ****


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               31




                        31 page printout

    Reproducible Electronic Publishing can defeat censorship.

          This file, its printout, or copies of either
          are to be copied and given away, but NOT sold.

          Bank of Wisdom, Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                          ****     ****

Edited by E. Haldeman-Julius

THE BLACK INTERNATIONAL                 No. 12

               THE TYRANNY OF THE CLERICAL GESTAPO

         CATHOLICS THE MOST PRIEST-RIDDEN OF ALL PEOPLE

                        by Joseph McCabe

                  HALDEMAN-JULIUS PUBLICATIONS
                     GIRARD  -- : --  KANSAS


                          ****     ****

   CHAPTER

     I    Poisoning the Mind of the Young ..................... 1

    II    The Priest Rules the Family ......................... 8

   III    The Priestly Censors of Morals ...................... 16

    IV    The Shame of the Confessional ....................... 22

     V    Catholic Action a Clerical Maneuver ................. 27

                          ****     ****

                            Chapter I

                 POISONING THE MIND OF THE YOUNG

     In the preceding booklet I showed that the structure of the
Church of Rome is such that an alliance with Fascist powers is its
inevitable attitude. It is an institution that survives from the
Feudal Age and, since it is not now permitted to exercise the
physical tyranny over men which it still claim's, it must, whenever
wealth and privilege are threatened, associate with any forces
which disown the democratic restraints of our age and by violence
and bloodshed suppress the critics of privilege and seek an
extension of their wealth and power. Historically it always did
this; and nearly all who are not Catholics, and very many
Catholic's, now see that this is in our time the meaning of the
diplomatic activity of the Vatican during the last ten years, the
shameless applauding of bestiality by the high priests of Germany
and Italy, the treason of the priests of Austria, Fiance, Spain,
Portugal, Belgium, and Czechoslovakia, and the support of
isolationism in the British Empire until 1939 and in the United
States until 1941, and in South America today.

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               1

               THE TYRANNY OF THE CLERICAL GESTAPO

     But how do the half-million agents of the Black International
contrive to win the support for such a policy of tens of millions
of men and women half of whom professed to be free Citizens of
democratic lands until the Papal-Fascist paralysis began to creep
over them and a very large part still live in such countries and
swear loyalty to their ideals? I have shown and will further show
in the fifth booklet of this series, that Catholic priests and
writers change their political philosophy with startling rapidity
when their country turns Fascist. In country after country in which
but a few years ago they talked about the principles of freedom and
democracy with all the gush that is so familiar on clerical lips in
America -- in Germany and Italy, in Franco Spain and Salazar
Portugal, in Vichy France and Belgium, Czecho-Slovakia and Austria
-- they now find those principles as demoded as drawers or corsets,
even "poisonous" and inconsistent with the authoritarian state
which the Pope urges upon all good Catholics. They have not yet
reached the stage in America and Britain. Will they do so? And if
not how can the Black International use the vast sums it extracts
from the people to help on a regime of tyranny and exploitation?

     First let us get a clear idea of the body of subscribing
members of the Church. How many Catholic's there are in the world
it is less easy to say than to ascertain the number of bacteria in
a cubic inch of soil. Comparing the figures given even by Catholics
is an ironic pastime. They are meticulously "accurate" down to the
last unit, yet they differ from each other by tens of millions;
which surely afford's some excuse even for a hardened skeptic like
myself. I consult the new Encyclopedia Americana, which has an odor
of sanctity as well as of scholarship, and learn, in an article by
a member of the editorial board (and apparently a Catholic) that
the number of Catholics in the world is 294,583,000. That sounds
admirably precise and moderate compared with the 350,000,000 or
even 398,277,000 (British Catholic Directory) which other Catholic
writers claim, but study how the figure is made up. In Europe, says
the writer, there are 183,760,000; and he then analyzes this into
35,000,000 in France (where optimistic Catholics do not claim more
than 10,000,000), 20,000,000 in Spain (where, when there were free
elections, the people so long overruled the Church that it had to
take to the long knife), 26,000,000 in Austria (where the total
population is only 7,000,000), 13,000,000 in Hungary (where the
population is about 9,000,000 and the Catholics are about half),
and so on.

     It is a greater miracle than the Immaculate Conception. But
Catholics absorb miracles as babies absorb milk. A distinguished
Catholic journalist D. Gwynn (Pius XI, 1932) quotes with approval
the agstirqnec of Macaulay that "there were certainly not fewer
than 150,000,000" in 1840. The population of most countries has
trebled since then, where not greatly affected by the birth control
of these wicked skeptics, yet Gwynn thinks that the growth of these
150,000,000 into 350,000,000 (his figure) in a century, and with
fertility joyous and unrestrained, "must astonish all inquirers."
And this writer, who is an expert on France, knows that the total
figure of Catholics he gives includes 30,000,000 Frenchmen and
proves in his special work on the subject (The Catholic Reaction in
France, 1924) that there cannot even be 10,000,000.



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               2

               THE TYRANNY OF THE CLERICAL GESTAPO

     Similarly in regard to the number of Catholics in America,
which concerns us most. The Encyclopedia Americana gives 50,000,000
for North America, of whom 20,000000 are in the United States. As
there are only about 4,000,000 Catholics in Canada and the whole
population of Mexico (which the Vatican does not regard as very
orthodox) is only 16,000,000, the arithmetic again transcends my
profane intelligence. But when I turn to the Census of Religion,
taken (that is to say, supplied by the clergy) in 1936 and
published as the official record in 1940, I learn that Roman
Catholics in the United States number only 19,914,957; and you
really must trust a figure that is so definite even to the last
unit. The official compiler reflects on the remarkable growth since
1926 (18,605,003 -- not a baby or a village idiot left out, you
notice). But an unconsecrated calculation seems to yield that in
that decade the general population of America, in spite of a
tremendous traffic in contraceptive's rose by more than 8 percent
while the Catholics, who abhor those diabolical devices, increased
by less than 7 percent.

     I should love to linger in this pious and stimulating field of
the statistics published by the Black International but we have
sterner business to approach, and I have written much elsewhere on
the subject. I have concluded, after many weary days spent in
analyzing the results of months of research, that the number of
genuine Catholics in the world is between 150,000,000 and
200,000,000, and it seems generous to use for practical purpose the
round figure of 190,000,000. It will be understood that I do not
include here the new compulsory Catholics of Italy, France,
Belgium, Spain, Portugal, Brazil, etc. If an American Catholic is
proud of them, and insists on including them let him do so; but is
it too much to ask that he state also, at least to himself, that
they have "returned to the Church" only while every priest is ready
to denounce rebel's to the firing squad or the torturer?

     But our figure invites further consideration. It includes
about 50,000,000 illiterate American Indians. Add the illiterates
of the Philippines (7,000,000), and the French, Belgian, and
Portuguese colonies, a large percentage of the peasants of Spain,
Portugal, Poland, Slovakia, etc., and you see that more than a
third of the grand Catholic total are folk whom we need not
consider here. It is no mystery how the priests keep them servile.
It is hardly more mysterious how they keep their despotic hold on
further tens of millions: the peasants of Spain, Portugal, Poland
and Italy who are called literate because they mastered their A B
C's and the dense masses of descendants of these who fester in the
poorer quarters of our cities and industrial towns. The domination
of these also by priests requires no profound explanation; and
quite a large number at the other end of the social scale are very
easy victims of clerical bossing of a subtler sort. Of the
remaining half of this grand total of 180,000,000 more than one-
third are children.

     We will discuss in the next book the whole question of
ignorance or culture, and varieties of culture, in the Roman
Church, but it is well to get clearly in mind here that when the
Catholic writer boasts of his 300,000,000 or 350,000,000, "Subjects
of the Pope," or when a statesman thinks that this gross figure 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               3

               THE TYRANNY OF THE CLERICAL GESTAPO

compels him to speak with profound respect of the Pope and his
Church, the suggestion is nonsensical. We shall further see that
the stuff imposed upon pupils in Catholic secondary schools and
colleges as "science" and "history" is a gorgeous tissue of untruth
that differs from the reality almost as much as a Theosophist's
view of ancient Egypt differs from that of an Egyptologist, so that
even in their case we are not greatly puzzled. However, let us
take the matter broadly. Leaving out of account the babes and
sucklings and the poor folk who either never open a book or could
not read one, how does the Church of Rome ensure the submissiveness
to a body of generally ignorant priests of some millions of men and
women in modern civilization?

     The first part of the answer is the Catholic school. Cardinal
Hayes, who had an astounding success in talking rank nonsense with
the utmost gravity, once said, referring to American preeminence in
education: "It is the Catholic contribution which has enabled the
United States to take the world's leadership in this field." Horace
Mann was, I suppose, a Roman Catholic, not a skeptic as the
Dictionary of American Biography represents him. . . . But, no one
will expect me to argue on that point. The Catholic hierarchy in
America never professed to have any other aim in collecting vast
sums -- they spent $23,000,000 on new schools in 1927 -- for the
erection of schools of their own than "the good of the Church," the
safeguarding of the faith (the docility to the clerical Gestapo) of
their people. They care nothing whatever about the general cultural
level of a country. They just whip up the laity to a fanatical zeal
for having schools of their own. Catholic ladies have told me,
defiantly, in England, where a question about the treatment -- that
is to say, the amount of subsidy they will vote out of public funds
-- of Catholic schools is prepared by the clergy and sternly
pressed upon candidates for election, that they would not for a
moment hesitate to vote for a candidate who promised to favor their
schools no matter what his views were on national or local policy.
Once the question of the Catholic school was raised by the priests
at an election they ignored every other issue.

     The zeal of the priests to whip up this fanaticism suggests at
once in what the Catholic differs from the national school. In most
parts of America today where there are large bodies of Catholics
the national school dare not permit a teacher or a class-book to
say a word that Catholics resent. Educational experts have shown
that in Boston and Chicago the Catholic clergy, acting through
their lay dupes, control education in this respect in the national
as well as their own schools. Even from third or fourth-rate towns
mothers have written me that the teachers of their children in the
national schools were so subject to Catholic influence that they
used real Catholic language. Possibly this partly explains why in
the United States Catholic schools, of all grades, have a less
proportion of pupils to the general membership of the Church than
in other countries. There are not many more than 2,000,000 pupils
in Catholic elementary schools, and if you multiply this by five,
the usual ratio of such pupils to total membership in Catholic
quarters, it would give America only 10,000,000 Catholics. One of
the drives of the hierarchy in recent years has been to spread
Catholics or Catholicism over the more thinly-populated regions so
as to get everywhere sufficient to claim a school or to eviscerate 
the teaching in the local national school.

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               4

               THE TYRANNY OF THE CLERICAL GESTAPO

     It is, of course, chiefly in regard to history, science, and
general knowledge classes (with reference to current events and
institutions) that the priests are so keen to, "protect" the child,
but even more important than this, the Church says, is "the
Catholic atmosphere." Every school is a church. Statues of Mary and
the more popular saints, painted in all the colors of the rainbow,
and Catholic colored pictures crowd the walls and window-ledges.
Prayers and hymns open and close the day, and specific lessons on
the faith are given or the children march to the church to hear
them. Holidays may be given in honor of distinguished
ecclesiastical visitors or important Church events. Mass must be
heard on the Church's "holy days" and children of seven and over
are conducted to the church periodically to confess their "sins."
From the age of five to sixteen or seventeen -- it is just the same
in the secondary school and the "academy" for girls -- the hypnotic
influence continues. Catholic books of the most mendacious
character are given as prizes. Semi-magical talisman's (blessed
medals, little pictures, scapulars, Agnus Deis or tiny wax lambs
enclosed in cloths, etc.) must be bought and worn next the skin
night and day. A Catholic adult goes to church once a week: a
Catholic child spends half the day in it every day. And the theme
of the myriad influences that seep into the child's mind all the
time is "Our Holy Faith:" our unique, incomparably superior,
exclusive, god-given creed.

     Why should one call this poisoning the mind? Isn't it a
scheme, devised and perfected by thousand's of educators of the
young before Pestalozzi and Froebel were born, for forming the
character of the child or training it in habits of decency, self-
restraint, truthfulness, and regard for others? When you read a
non-Catholic writer who says that sort of thing inquire if he has
ever taken the least trouble to ascertain whether the Catholic
children who have spent nine or ten years in this atmosphere are in
fact any better than any body of children who have been reared in
a purely, or almost purely, secular school-atmosphere. I wager that
you will find that these "liberal" writers have never even glanced
at the question. They could discover with very little trouble that
in any of the blacker areas of our cities -- the areas in which
chronic poverty and ignorance have created a tradition of unsocial
conduct -- the Catholics are not a bit less drunken, violent, and
prone to vice and crime than their neighbors. They could learn
authoritatively that Catholic's have a higher percentage in the
jails and brothels than they have in the general population. They
can learn the facts about social behavior in Ireland or any
predominantly Catholic country. They know that in our class or
social environment Catholics are not superior to others in sound
qualities. of character.

     The Catholic primary school which I attended 60 to 70 years
ago was in a poor industrial suburb of a large city. I often go
back to it to observe the very great progress it has made in
cleanliness, sobriety, restraint, public decency, and all important
social qualities. It was very foul in my boyhood, and I knew all
its vices and crimes. Catholic workers as a body behaved like
others all round me, and what a boy did not see he did not fail to
learn from others. Vividly do I remember how, when the master left
us in the higher forms for a half-hour, the older boys from the 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               5

               THE TYRANNY OF THE CLERICAL GESTAPO

poorest and least restrained quarters told us, joyously, every bit
of foulness they had picked up, while Mary and the Saints looked
down at us from the walls, and how behavior out of school was such
as one would expect.

     The real function of the school was to make loyal Catholics of
us, to din into our ears until it was ineffaceable impressed that
our religion was not a religion like that of the Protestant
schoolboys, but the truth from God that could tolerate no
comparison. A favorite sport was for the whole body of us to
"Scuttle" (stone) the pupils of some Protestant school and chant
some doggerel like "Prodidog, Prodidog, go to hell, while all the
Catholics ring the bell"; and the priests and teachers never
preached to us on that. They would today, of course; Catholics must
show that they are good neighbors; but beneath all the smiles and
recognitions that "there is good in all religions" you see the same
arrogance and intolerance. Catholics are unique. All the world
belongs to us, and will come back to us when the work of the devil,
which began at the Reformation, is finally undone. The parallel
with Nazism is again perfect; and the aim is the same -- the power
and wealth of the Leaderg and the Gestapo. The whole purpose of
this ceaseless droning about the uniqueness of our Holy Church and
Holy Faith and Holy Mother and Holy everything down to the water
for chasing devils is to make and keep Catholics submissive. So
they can be raised, almost without explanation, to a blind fury
against Russia or Mexico, can be turned into howling mobs to
prevent their neighbors from seeing films which the priests do not
like, can be fooled for years about the real meaning of the policy
in which they are induced to cooperate.

     If this blind devotion, with its inevitable submissiveness to
authority, be not thought poisonous enough, remember that it is in
large part secured by a monstrous and mischievous untruth. Belief
in hell and devils belongs to a stage of human development that is
not consistent with modern ideals. Probably the majority of priests
do not believe in them today. But they are as essential to the
Catholic school and journalism as a heroine is to a novel. They are
essential, not for moral purposes -- this flimsy scaffolding of
character is one of the chief reasons why the Catholic training
breaks down in post-school years -- but as an instrument of moral
terrorism and to protect the myth of the holiness and uniqueness of
the Church. The Church, the child gradually learns, has so many
"enemies" (critics) just because it is so holy and precious. The
devil, who is picturesquely represented to every child as a sort of
super-Nazi with a devouring thirst to bring more and more million's
of souls into his overcrowded and insanitary domain, is at the back
of all this opposition to the Church. The good Catholic must not
even listen to what his agents say, most particularly when they
assume the disguise of honest and decent men. For "sins of the
flesh" the Catholic can get pardon at any time and escape hell by
confessing but to leave the Church, to read or hear anything that
might cause one to leave the Church, is the most terrible sin of
all because one obviously cuts oneself off from the tribunals of
forgiveness and the "channels of grace" (sacraments). So from the
age of seven the children are made to sing, lustily, hymn's with
lines such as "hell is raging for my soul" and "earth and hell
unite, and swear in lasting bonds to bind us."


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               6

               THE TYRANNY OF THE CLERICAL GESTAPO

     It would take a whole book to analyze adequately the
comprehensive poison of this "Catholic atmosphere." A psychologist
would find it a fascinating study in social psychology but of
course, no psychologist in America dare publish a book on it. I
will give in the next book some weird evidence, which has just
reached me, of the ripe results of it in Catholic countries, but I
must here be content with a bare outline of this first part of the
mechanism of the clerical Gestapo for making and keeping the people
blindly submissive and zealous for "the good of the Church."

     It is hardly necessary to add that the lessons are carefully
arranged to suit the atmosphere. The Bible is rarely seen -- in my
youth few Catholics ever saw a Bible -- but there are lessons, on
Fundamentalist lines on "biblical history" as a gradual preparation
of the world for the coming of Christ and his instructions (mainly
secret) to found the wonderful Church. Science is fearfully
mutilated. Colleges can have admirable chemical and physical
laboratories because inorganic science is quite harmless, and
botany is fairly safe. The mutilation begins with geology and
paleontology. They are today manuals of evolution, so you can
imagine what the Catholic version of them looks like. General
biology and physiology must be adulterated so as sustain the myth
of a "vital principle," and Catholic psychology is as far removed
from science as the Civil War is from modern politics. Prehistoric
archeology, the science of prehistoric man, is, when any notice at
all is taken of it, a sheer caricature.

     But history is the great field of the poisoner. A very
familiar jibe speaks of liars, damned liars, and statistics. It is
a clumsy absurdity as regards statistics but a neat classification
if you change the word to "Catholic historians." I need not here
examine the manuals used in Catholic schools. In my various works
I have nailed many thousand Catholics to the counter and shown that
even the Catholic Encyclopedia, the flower of American Romanist
scholarship, is full of them. You can therefore gather what kind of
stuff they impose upon their own children in their own schools and
colleges.

     I repeat that it is not merely mendacious but poisonous. When
a Jesuit can say in what all American Catholics consider to be the
cream of their scholarship (the Encyclopedia) that all branches of
the Church recognized the supremacy of the Pope in the first four
centuries, which is the exact opposite of the truth, you know what
to expect. The version of history, from the alleged and mythical
years of Peter in Rome to the exploits of the present Pope, that is
imposed upon Catholics, beginning in the elementary school, is the
richest tissue of brazen lies that I know. And, which one need not
tear one's hair because children are taught as history those lives
of saints and martyrs which Catholic authorities denounce as
forgeries, the story as a whole is profoundly mischievous and
antisocial. Its one aim is like the purpose of all the rest, to
keep Catholics so submissive to their caste of consecrated guides
that they will swallow every statement or instruction without
serious inquiry into its justice or injustice.





                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               7

               THE TYRANNY OF THE CLERICAL GESTAPO

                           Chapter II

                   THE PRIEST RULES THE FAMILY

     It would be a mistake to imagine the troops of Catholic boys
and girls who issue from the primary or the secondary school every
year as just as solidly enthusiastic for their Holy Faith as a
troop of boys or girls issuing from an Adolf Hitler School in
Germany. I take it that the conditions are much the same in urban
America as in urban Britain, and in the latter there is plenty of
Catholic evidence that boys desert the Church in very large numbers
during the three or four years after leaving school. At Catholic
conferences of teachers and priests it has been stated that in
British cities 30 to 60 percent (in different localities) of the
boys abandon the Church. This can surprise only those folk who
lazily admit, as most do, the Catholic boast of "marvelous
numerical progress", in Britain and America. In neither country are
they making any numerical progress. I have shown over and over
again, and have in the last chapter pointed out that the latest
Census figures confirm this, that the Catholic body, in spite of
its higher birth rate, does not increase as much as the general
body of the population. It is a pity there is no American who can
force this truth into the official mind at Washington.

     The transfer of the Catholic children from the artificial
atmosphere of the school to the secular life is something like
transplanting hot house seedlings to the open air in a late spring.
There would, in fact, be a still larger number of casualties if it
were not for the fact that the boy has already spent two hours on
the street or outside the school for every hour he has spent in its
theatrically insincere atmosphere. He has already learned that
there is considerable doubt about these picturesque devils who are
raging for his little soul and about the holiness of his priests
and popes. The girl who passes from the nuns' academy to a city
store or workshop finds that the section of her anatomy which the
good sisters told her, with bated, breath and downcast eyes, is the
Temple of the Holy Ghost now learns that that is not the general
view. Of course they have been prepared for this by warnings that
"the world" is like "the flesh" and the devil, a deadly enemy of
the good Catholic. Somehow the world, when the child enters it,
does, not quite resemble the villain of an old-time melodrama. The
hold of the Gestapo begins to slip.

          The priest prepares for this by his grip on the family.
I say that Catholics are the most priest-ridden of all people but
it will not be forgotten that the power of the priest differs
enormously in different places: in Quebec and in Ohio, in rural
Mexico or Brazil and in New York City, with every shade of
difference between those two extremes. No one who knows the "really
Catholic country" (even Eire) will question that the people are far
more priest-ridden, more bullied and intimidated by the clergy,
than people are in rural Protestant areas, to say nothing of people
under Buddhist, Hindu, Shinto, Taoist, Moslem, or Jewish
authorities. The Jews and Moslem have no priests, in the ordinary
sense, and the priests of the Asiatic nations do little more than 




                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               8

               THE TYRANNY OF THE CLERICAL GESTAPO

perform ceremonies. Yet, although the priest in America has not yet
the despotic power his colleague has in Quebec or Portugal -- he 
expects to have it someday -- I am inclined to say that even in
America Catholics are amongst the most priest-ridden of people.

     The clergy dominate the family as they do the school. It is
the priest's duty to visit every home in his parish once in
(usually) three months. Naturally he shirks unattractive homes and
spends more time in those where the company is jovial and the
bottle travels freely. He generally has a little directory or note-
book with particulars about each. I do not suggest that Catholic
married women are more pliant than others but it will occur to most
people that the visit of the priest in the afternoon, when the
husband is at his job and the children are in school, comes pretty
close to G.B. Shaw's explanation of the popularity of marriage: it
combines the maximum of temptation with the maximum of opportunity.
There is, of course, a good deal of misconduct, for the priest of
amorous disposition can learn on which day the "help" is away, but,
whatever else happens, the priest takes this opportunity to inquire
about the loyalty of the husband and the children who have left
school. An unsatisfactory report will bring him in the evening to
see them.

     In order to appreciate the priest's peculiar control over the
family one must understand the power which the Church claims and
exercises over marriage. From the 4th Century it fought for 700
years to get this power, and the laity successfully resisted until
the bloody-minded "saintly" Popes Gregory VII and Innocent III
perfected the Roman scheme of priestcraft, and the "great"
Schoolmen proved to demonstration that this scheme, a transparent
clerical fabrication of comparatively recent date, was established
by Christ. How the priests won this power just when gaiety and
skepticism were increasing in Europe must be read elsewhere.
Briefly the Church brought matrimony under its iron authority by
making it a sacrament, an indissoluble contract, a ceremony
essentially requiring the presence of a priest. It discovered
"impediments," some of which were subject to removal by
dispensation (to the great profit of the Vatican) and some,
theoretically, not. This not only led to a prodigious traffic in
dispensations, which still continues in large part as I explained
in the last book, but it gave the archbishops and Popes a very
important authority over the lives of nobles, princes, and monarchs
in the matter of their marriage's.

     Three cases which have been fully discussed by American
critics like Boyd-Barrett, Marshall, and Selde's and may here be
recalled briefly, will illustrate this tyranny. The late Count
(then Mr.) Marconi married the Hon. Beatrice O'Brien in a
Protestant church in London -- "she was a Protestant and he an
apostate" -- in 1905. They had three children but separated in 1918
and were divorced in 1924. The Church very generously concedes that
it does not claim authority over non-Catholic marriages, but it
also claims that one who has been baptized a Catholic, as Marconi
had been, remains subject to it. In any case Marconi wanted to
marry the Catholic Countess Bizzi-Scala, and he applied to Cardinal
Bourne in London for a declaration that his marriage was null and
void from the start: in other words, that he had never been married


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               9

               THE TYRANNY OF THE CLERICAL GESTAPO

to Beatrice O'Brieri -- though the Church, with great charity and
ingenuity, declares that the children of these sham marriages are
legitimate. The canonists at Rome fastened upon the fact, or the
allegation -- you know what evidence is worth in divorce suits --
that Marconi and his bride had agreed before marriage that if it
proved unhappy they would seek a divorce. Therefore there was no
real marriage, said the learned priests of London, pocketing their
fees. But Beatrice did not altogether like the idea that her
children were only saved from being bastards by the sophistry of
priests and she appealed to the Rota tribunal at Rome. Marconi was
now rich and he "paid the expenses" of the trial. He got his decree
of nullity, married his countess, and was in high favor at the
Vatican until he died in 1937.

     In the second famous case Consuelo Vanderbilt, who had married
the Duke of Marlborough in 1895, left him in 1905 (after bearing
two sons) and got a divorce, applied to these learned and ingenious
Catholic authorities in London to ease her conscience by declaring
the marriage null from the start. You see, she now wanted to marry
the Catholic Count Balsan. The London authorities had to share so
promising a case with the Roman Rota, and the decree of nullity was
granted. She had, she swore, married against her will and because
her mother said that she would die of heart-disease unless Consuelo
married the Duke. No internal consent, said Rome, so no marriage.
Consult the authors I have named if you want to read the testimony
of these aristocratic folk in detail and learn how the Vatican
authorities proved to the hilt, when a storm arose, that they were
absolutely compelled to declare the marriage null and money had
nothing to do with it. What interests me is the Church of Rome here
claims a power that is not only greater than but antagonistic to
that of the State. What, you probably ask, would be the social
situation if every girl who thought her husband a beast could go to
a court and get it to declare that she was not married to him
because "I didn't want to marry him -- mother made me," or "he,
said he would let me get a divorce if I wasn't happy"? But, don't
be too nervous. First, She would get no alimony. Secondly, Rome
does not deal with a hundred cases a year and says that half of
them are "free." We already know something about Rome's "free"
services. The certificate may be free, but the frame may cost a
mighty lot of dollars.

     A third case confirms us in these cynical reflection's. Miss
Anna Gould -- how the names in these cases do smell of money --
married the Marquis de Castellane in 1895, went through the usual
routine until they quarreled, divorced him in 1906 and married the
Duke de Sagan. He was a Catholic, but with true French chivalry he
deserted the Church for his loved (and wealthy) Anna. The elegant
Castellane, being a Catholic, felt himself out in the cold and
applied to Rome for a nullity-decree so that he could marry again.
Anna had, he said, spoken about divorce before their marriage. The
cardinals of the Rota rejected his application, accepted it on
appeal, then rejected it again. Castellane appealed to the Pope,
who referred the matter to a committee of cardinals, and they
declared the marriage invalid. To be quite sure on so sacred a
point the Pope enlarged the committee, and it declared the marriage
valid. Don't imagine that a count, a marquis, or a millionaire
always gets this previous decree. But you might care to ask me 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               10

               THE TYRANNY OF THE CLERICAL GESTAPO

whether all the marquis's money had gone or whether American
dollars were weighed against his thin French francs. I regret that
the finances of these spiritual transactions are kept in a decent
secrecy.

     A fourth case differently illustrates this beneficent power of
the Church to tie and untie indissoluble marriages. A few years ago
a Catholic American actress fell in love with a married producer.
He got a divorce from his Jewess wife but the austere Church will
no more allow a marriage to a divorced person than it will grant a
divorce. The man however became a Catholic and married his Catholic
actress. Now, there's a pretty conundrum: so pretty that when I
published the facts in London two years ago one of the chief
writers on one of the chief Catholic papers howled that here I
displayed either my gross ignorance of Catholic matters or . . .
The rest was silence. They delicately refrain from calling me a
liar -- in print.

     But it is simple, and this Catholic journalist would have
learned a little about her own religion if she had read the article
"Pauline Privilege" in her Catholic Encyclopedia. Paul -- remember,
in mitigation, that he did not know that marriage is a sacrament
and indissoluble -- advised lady-members of the little group called
Churches that when one was married to a pagan who was contemptuous
of his faith she was free, after gently expostulating with him in
vain, to leave him and marry a Christian. Those learned theologians
of the Middle Ages who made a stalwart defense of the whole scheme
of priestcraft and are now pressed upon us by Catholic apologists
as modern-minded thinkers, worked out that this was quite
consistent with marriage being a sacrament and indissoluble, and it
is part of the law of the Church today. In the case I have given
above we have a simple application of it. The gentleman becomes a
Catholic, doubtless after profound meditation on the beauty of the
faith and not because priests had told him about the Pauline
Privilege. To meet American civil law he has already divorced his
wife, but in the eyes of the Church he is still married. All that
he had to do however is to ask his late wife, whose answer you can
imagine if you know the riper Yiddish, if she cares to become a
Catholic or to live with him without ever making any reflections on
his religious adventures. Even from this, however, Rome claims
(clause 1211 of the new Canon Law) that it can grant a
dispensation, and, the lady being already divorced, it was probably
not done. The emancipated partner is then free without any further
fuss to marry a good member of the Church.

     Other aspects of Catholic law and practice illustrate this
power of the clerical Gestapo, even to the extent of flouting the
civil law, in a matter which is generally regarded as the supreme
personal concern in the life of a man or woman. Although this
control of marriage is so obviously priest-manufactured that the
laity, as I said, defeated for many centuries every attempt to
obtain its legislation about marriage fills one of the longer
sections of the new Code of Canon Law, and from the elaborate
nature of the clauses you will understand that very large and
profitable body of the appeals to the Roman Congregations which I
described. Probably the most lucrative dogmas (to the Italian 



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               11

               THE TYRANNY OF THE CLERICAL GESTAPO

caucus) in the Whole Roman scheme are the sacramental nature of
marriage and the doctrine of purgatory (through indulgences), and
both are transparent medieval fabrications in so far as they are
dogmas.

     Notoriously the Church goes beyond any civil law in assigning
the degrees of relationship within which it is forbidden to marry.
In the Middle Ages they stretched so far that in a small town or
village everybody was related to everybody, and it was a golden age
of dispensations; or it would have been if folk had taken their
religion seriously in the Middle Ages. The new Canon Law says that
Catholics must not marry (without a Roman license) if they are
related by blood within three degrees, by marriage, within two
degrees, or by spiritual relationship (god parents in baptism). So
it is no longer possible for canonists to say, as they did in the
Middle Age's, that a marriage from which a rich person wants to
escape, never was a marriage because (as in the case of "Saint"
Louis and the very un-saintly Queen Eleanor) the man is related to
the woman through some incident they have succeeded in discovering
in the lives of their great-great-grandparents, or through an act
of fornication, which in that age might be taken for granted
between their fifth cousins or other remote relatives. But the
field is still rich in possibilities; note carefully that marriages
which are valid in civil law are not valid in Church law and vice
versa.

     Mixed marriages are another interesting field. I have recently
been consulted on two cases in England. M has married N (a
Catholic) on a strict agreement of honor between themselves that no
religion shall be imposed upon children of the marriage, who shall
choose their philosophy of life when they grow up. There is one
child, now in her early teen's, and the wife repudiates the
promise, at the priest's order, and she and her relatives choke the
girl with proselytism. In the second case a man wants to marry a
Catholic girl, and she has assured him that there is no law of the
Church that all children of a mixed marriage shall be baptized and
reared in the Catholic Church.

     I am not concerned with whether these girls lied on their own
account or were directed by the priest to lie -- I beg his pardon,
to make a "mental reservation." Both are equally possible. But the
law of the Church is clear. Not only is a dispensation required for
a mixed marriage but it will be granted only on four conditions
(clause 1061). There must be a serious reason: the non-Catholic
must promise never to say anything to disturb the Catholic's faith
and must agree to the Catholic baptism and education of all
children: the priest must be morally certain that the promise will
be kept: and he must have the promise in writing. The next clause
(1062) says that the Catholic party (who gets a promise that his or
her faith shall never be interfered with) must solemnly promise to
take every opportunity to interfere with the creed of ("convert")
the non-Catholic. Clause 1070 enacts that such a marriage is
invalid unless the Catholic has got a dispensation, so that the
promises cannot be evaded by concealing the marriage from the
Church.

 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               12

               THE TYRANNY OF THE CLERICAL GESTAPO

     Another provision which flouts civil law and has led to a vast
amount of social trouble is that a Catholic (a baptized person,
whether he or she has left the Church or not) does not enter into
a valid marriage unless it is performed by a priest (1904). This
was enacted by the Council of Trent so as to prevent Catholics
secretly slipping from the power of the priest. When Catholics
multiplied in Protestant countries, some of which bitterly resented
such interference, Rome often suspended it, but in 1908 it was
declared to be in force in all countries. You see one consequence
of it. The millions in America who were baptized in the Church and
later left it and married like other citizens are to their Catholic
friends, not married, and their children are bastards.

     There is a similar defiance of civil law in the enactment that
a couple who had committed adultery before marriage, or ex-nuns and
priests who had once taken a vow of celibacy are not validly
married. On the other hand, this very peculiar code of law about
marriage, which is supposed to have raised civilization in this
respect to a higher level, again drastically flouts civil law by
Saying (1104) that a priest can for "a very serious reason"
celebrate a marriage without witnesses and conceal it from the
civic authorities by entering it in a "secret register," and that
such a marriage is perfectly valid. Further, Church Law says that
youth's can validly marry at the age of 16 and girls at the age of
14 (which in Britain is two years below the legal age of consent).
And in fine this Code of the Church that never makes a moral
mistake lays great stress on that need of "internal consent" which,
as I showed in the above cases, opens a wide field for perjury and
contempt of the civil law. Some of the American judges who tell
their fellow-citizens how the Roman Church "does good" and
strengthens American civilization would not exactly be embarrassed
if married folk applied to them for divorce on the simple ground
that they were prepared to swear that they "did not really consent"
when they said "I do." They would order them out of court.

     I am not in this book concerned with the defiance of civil law
and authority which is implied, if not flouted, in these clauses,
and the defiance of our modern ethic of sex-relations we will
consider in a later book. For the moment it is enough that here we
have an invasion of the most personal concerns of men and women
which really beats the Gestapo. Concerned as the Nazis are about
copulation and children, they are content with one drastic law-
forbidding copulation with Jews -- and leave the rest to the
influence of their "ideals." What will occur to any reader, even if
he is entirely ignorant of the history of these matters or does not
know that the laws were framed in an age of intense priestcraft, is
that they so obviously mean power and wealth to the clergy. To say
that they have an important moral or social significance is
preposterous. Some of the laws are plainly created for the profit
of selling dispensations from them, and all are designed to extend
and emphasize the power of the Black International over the laity.
The Fuhrer has framed them: the Gauleiter and the Gestapo see to
the observance of them.

     I have said little about divorce, though the Church's refusal
to recognize the validity of it is clearly a monstrous invasion of
the civic rights of a man or woman. It is as useless to talk about 
Christian duty as about the sanctity of marriage and social 

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               13

               THE TYRANNY OF THE CLERICAL GESTAPO

interests. Until the 11th Century the Church recognized more
grounds of divorce than the majority of states do today. The Greek
and most of the Protestant Churches, who know just as much about
Christian duty but less about priestcraft, recognize divorce. And
the Roman Church at once, when it suppressed divorce as part of its
comprehensive assertion of power over the laity, permitted an
extraordinary development of those nullity-decrees which I
illustrated in the foregoing cases. Catholics who had money were as
free to change partners as folk are in most of the states of the
American Union today. That is no reckless statement. The highest
authority on France in the beautiful 13th Century, Prof. Luchaire,
often claimed to be a Catholic and certainly not anti-Catholic,
says that women of the noble class "had a minimum of three or four
(successive) husbands." I have fully dealt with that elsewhere and
must not be tempted to enlarge upon it here.

     The law against birth-control is an even more audacious, more
purely clerical, and more recent invasion of the rights of the
individual and the family. The motive for that sacred fury of
priests and bishops against the use of contraceptives which causes
them to hound women like Margaret Sanger, get Catholic mobs to
break up meetings, and make insolent attacks on medical or civic
authorities who favor the establishment of clinics has in reality
nothing to do with either morals or religion. It is an occasion for
asserting and thereby increasing their power in the community, and
it is one way of impressing more deeply on their own people the
prohibition of birth-control. It keeps up the fiction that it is
"filthy."

     There are few points on which the claim of the Black
International is as plainly based on their own material interest as
it is here. There is nothing in traditional Catholic theology that
makes birth control sinful. The question did not arise until the
19th Century when the birth rate began to gain on the death rate
and when the extensive use of crude contraceptive's began in
France. It then became apparent to the clergy that if non-Catholics
checked their natural increase by the use of preventives and
Catholics could be intimidated from using these by a threat of
eternal punishment the Church might hope in this way to cover to
some extent its large numerical losses. A Catholic mother told me
that her priest had frankly said this at one of their "mother's
meetings." It is, at all events, not only the true but the obvious
inspiration of the clerical opposition to birth control; and it is
one of the grossest pieces of Gestapo tyranny over the family and
the individual. It is one of the points on which the Pope most
naturally allied himself with Germany, Italy and Japan. They wanted
as many potential soldiers as possible: the Church wanted as many
contributing members as possible. Neither cared the toss of a coin
about the other reasons.

     It is here frankly ridiculous to ask us to pay serious
attention to the solemn statements of grounds for the opposition
which Catholics are now invited to insert even in our
Encyclopedias. To quote the "divine command" to "increase and
multiply" from a piece of ancient Jewish fiction is an insult to
our intelligence; especially on the part of priests and nuns who
pretend to be superior to the rest of us precisely by ignoring the 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               14

               THE TYRANNY OF THE CLERICAL GESTAPO

command and regarding the mechanism of multiplication as even more
repulsive than defecation. But the usual argument that God's will
and purpose in the organs of generation is defied, is not much
better. This also is stultified by the doctrine of the Church that
priests, monks, and nun's, who are presumably equipped with those
organs, are much dearer to God just because they forswear the use
of them. But the argument is in itself absurd. It was used against
the use of anesthetics in difficult childbirth. It is answered by
the Catholic's own defense of celibacy: that provided a sufficient
number of people marry and couple to maintain the population the
"divine purpose" is met.

     In any case, now that medicine and surgery are increasingly
reducing the death rate an unrestrained birth rate is a growing
evil. When Hitler and Mussolini and the Japanese government forbade
Malthusian propaganda and whipped up the birth rate explicitly as
a preparation for war, were they cooperating with the divine
purpose? Is a great war, which checks the growth of the population,
part of that purpose? Are bacteria and fatal diseases?
Overpopulation is, notoriously, an outstanding cause of poverty,
suffering, unemployment, even war. But overpopulation would be
grave in our own time if it were not for the general use of
contraceptives and in the future it would reach heights which these
opponents of birth control on social grounds never dare consider.
Without birth control or immigration (which is ceasing) the
population of the United States would be 500,000,000 in the year
2000, 4,000,000,000 in 2110. . . . Need I continue.

     The Catholic clerical attitude is a piece of blatant
hypocrisy. Its real purpose is to strengthen the power of the
clergy and multiply those who support them. Its ostensible grounds
are so flimsy that Catholic men and women are in this respect
defying their priests to such an extent that the matter is now
openly discussed in Catholic literature. For their more comfortable
and better educated people they have had to say that it is
permissible to restrict births by refusing to have intercourse
except in the wife's sterile period, but they cheat even these
because the Ogino-Kraus theory of sterility which they follow is --
and the clerical leaders must know it -- rejected by the great
majority of medical authorities. Most of us would like to
characterize their interference in such matters in even stronger
language, because at the best it is based upon a view of sexual
intercourse at which the modern world smiles, but we must be
content to point out that we have here a tyranny over a man's life
which goes far beyond the claims and practices of the Gestapo.

     A final illustration of the tyranny over the family is the
childish ceremony of "churching" or Purification. When a child is
born it is rushed to church at the earliest date the doctor permits
for "baptism." This is Supposed by those who take a "broad view" of
the Roman Church to be just a registration of the newcomer in the
ranks of the faithful. It is, of course, nothing of the kind. It is
part of the scheme of clerical control and is based upon a priest-
made superstition that seems to any properly educated person
revolting. The idea of it is that all men are born with the
sentence of eternal punishment, or at least of eternal exclusion 



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               15

               THE TYRANNY OF THE CLERICAL GESTAPO

from heaven, hanging over them (original sin) because a legendary
Adam broke into a legendary orchard ages ago. That pink morsel of 
flesh is, on Catholic teaching, to suffer, privately, forever for
Adam's sin if it died before it is put through the weird rites
known as baptism!

     Most people think that the tyranny and absurdity -- one would
almost say obscenity -- end there but they do not. Because ages ago
in the dawn of Hebrew civilization, when savage superstitions still
lingered in the tribes, the priests laid it down (Leviticus, XII:2)
that a woman was "unclean" after bearing a child -- for seven days
if it was a boy and fourteen if it was a girl -- and must go to the
priest to be purified, priests get the Catholic women of Boston,
New York, and Chicago to act upon the same childish superstition
today. It is voluntary, but the priests urge it upon every "good"
Catholic mother. Polite non-Catholics say that it is just a pretty
symbolical ceremony. As usual, they decline to look up the facts.
The ritual enjoins that the woman must remain, as a sort of sinner,
"at the door of the church" until the priest's magic has "purified"
her, and then leads her into the church. He has made an honest
woman of her. Photographs of the ceremony in the 20th Century ought
to be preserved amongst those records of contemporary life which
are stored in some places for the future sociologist.


                           Chapter III

                 THE PRIESTLY CENSORS OF MORALS

     These points do not tell the whole story of that tyranny over
the family which the priest exercises, largely through his
afternoon visitations. He wants to know if parents and children
have joined the various societies and fraternities, suited to every
age and both sexes, which are organized for the purpose of carrying
his school-control over later years, We return to these in the last
chapter. He inquires if any fail to attend the church every Sunday,
what they read, what shows and dances they attend, whether the
children who have left school have fallen into "bad company," and
so on. Whether he is really concerned about their morals or no
depends upon the character of the priest, which is generally
doubtful, but every priest is very keen on keeping them in the
Church. Where the Catholic body is strong and includes a number of
Catholic employers the priest has a very persuasive argument for
loyalty. I have known a priest in a British town of medium size to
walk into a shop in which a Catholic had a score of employees and
order him to dismiss non-Catholics and hire Catholics recommended
by himself, or order a woman who kept a small store, to cancel her
purchase's from non-Catholic sources and deal with Catholics. But
here we are mainly concerned with that form of tyranny which the
priest calls concern about the morals of Catholics.

     Here the "unprejudiced" non-Catholic -- it is remarkable how
often a writer whose circulation can be injured or promoted by the
clergy or a politician with an eye on the Catholic vote -- becomes
ironical. Do we, he asks, first deny that the Church "does good"
and then quarrel with it for attempting to do good by a paternal
vigilance over the morals of the community? Or do we deny that 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               16

               THE TYRANNY OF THE CLERICAL GESTAPO

moral culture has anything to do with the welfare and progress of
a civilization? I must defer to a later book the reply to the
second question, in which we must discriminate, but we may remind
these "liberal" folk of one or two matters that concern the answer
to the first, which he regards as so easy.

     One point is that the concern of the Black International about
conduct is far less than its concern about loyalty and is largely
hypocritical. Ever since the early part of the Middle Ages the
Church has insisted on its dual guardianship of faith and morals,
yet I have abundantly shown in my historical works that, while it
adopted murderous methods of guarding the faith of the people it
was so really unconcerned about their morals that the period when
the power of priests and Popes was supreme (the 11th to the 16th
Century) was the most immoral in the history of normal
civilization. I do not here take the word morals to refer chiefly
to sexual morals. I say that there was more fiendish cruelty, more
ghastly injustice to the poorer nine-tenth's of the community, more
contempt of the idea of honor and good faith, than in any other 400
years of history apart from the Dark Ages. But the verdict is
particularly sound if you make the Christian sex-code one of the
chief points of your ethical scheme of conduct; and this state of
things -- see my large History of Morals -- lasted well into the
19th Century and lingered longer in Catholic than in non-Catholic
countries.

     To express surprise or incredulity at this statement is to
confess that one has never made a serious study of it. At its best
the Catholic code is false to the realities of life and largely
based upon superstitions about sex that the candid mind at once
rejects. Further, it is framed in a doctrinal system on the level
of the crude boogie-will-get-you-if-you-are-naughty of the nursery.
The moment the Catholic goes out into life, either on leaving the
school or (in the case of the Irish), by emigration to a better
educated country, the framework begins to yield to the acid in the
new atmosphere. Thirdly the Church has frustrated its moral
efforts, as far as we can respect these, by making it easy for the
people to escape what it calls "the consequences of sin" (the
confessional, indulgences, etc.). And fourthly the clergy
themselves have throughout the Catholic countries shown, and in
Catholic countries continue to show, a monumental example of
vicious conduct: lying, intolerance, cruelty, greed, and disloyalty
to their vows. I have fully developed these points elsewhere and
need only summarily recall them. The fourth point applies less in
our age, since the clergy are compelled by public opinion to mind
their own conduct, but they still apply.

     But is not the zeal of the priests for good morals in our time
something new and of valuable service to the community? Is it not
on this ground that they unite with other Churches -- with "good
people everywhere," in a current phrase -- and so promote the
interests of the state that Washington is bound to treat them with
respect? Are they not now so really resentful of vicious conduct
that they go out beyond the Catholic family and parish and have a
deep influence on the morals of the whole community?




                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               17

               THE TYRANNY OF THE CLERICAL GESTAPO

     In discussing these matters we are up against a large problem
-- the question which moral code or which clauses of it are
socially important -- that must be deferred to the sixth book of
this series, where we will boldly challenge the whole ideal of the
Church. But we can make a provisional reply. It is that the priest
certainly wants to control the morals of the entire community. He
does not merely forbid his own people to go to see a film in which
his Church finds immorality but he brings heavy pressure to bear on
film companies and fires his Knights of Columbus and Dames of the
Holy Grail to intimidate exhibitors so that even non-Catholics
shall not see them. His Church brings the same pressure to bear on
authors, publishers, and booksellers to prevent them from supplying
the general non-Catholic public. He threatens civic authorities
with the Catholic vote unless they send the police to stamp down on
these "filthy" and "swinish" discussions (which he has never beard)
on birth control. Of all that there is so little question that I do
not think it necessary to give here proofs of Catholic
interference. Seldes and other writers give plenty of evidence, but
in point of fact Catholics boast of what thy do in this field, and
I do not suppose there is an American who has not heard of Breen
and the Catholic spiritual guides of the pious colony of artists at
Hollywood or of the campaign against birth control.

     What is more important is to understand why they assert this
moral censorship. A distinguished British social writer, the late
John A. Hobson, being pressed to defend the puritanical code which
(from force of environment) he upheld though he was a skeptic and
generally addressed himself to skeptics, replied that he placed it
on an aesthetic basis. Logically that is unassailable. A man has as
much right to prefer a certain type of character as a certain type
of female figure; though, naturally, this gives him no right to
quarrel with a neighbor's different taste. But this theory at once
removes the question of chastity from the field of sociology. The
stability of civilization does not depend upon tastes but upon hard
facts, and it is now generally agreed by men who do not allow
priests to dictate their opinions that whether, for instance, an
actress in a film or on a stage has too narrow a diaper or how many
young folks decline to wait until they are married are not issues
of any serious social significance. The priest, of course, raises
a vague suggestion that civilization crumbles if we permit are to
raise the temperature a degree or two and mumbles about ancient
Greece and Rome (which were really more virtuous even in this
respect than his Beautiful 13th Century), but most of us have got
beyond those fairy-tales of Catholic history.

     Why then is the Black International in America so frothy with
sacred fury about morals? Mainly because it gives them an important
place in public life and furnishes a nice-sounding excuse to the
politicians and other's who find it profitable to give them
prestige and influence or dangerous to refuse them. The priests
help to guard the foundations of the state, the American home and
family. And so on. Many of these politicians, civic authorities,
editors, etc., who smile beside the priests on public platforms may
even believe what they say because none of them know the facts,
about morals in past ages or the genuine sociological position of
morals. You might as well expect them to make deep economic study
to ascertain the truth when bankers and industrialists assure them 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               18

               THE TYRANNY OF THE CLERICAL GESTAPO

that unrestricted competition is the second chief foundation of the
state or to inquire, when they are told that something is un-
American, whether America is really better off without it. Anyhow,
statesmen, bankers, editors, judges, and employer's just take the
word of the Church that it is doing a most important work and pass
on the good news to the public. The priest goes back to his people
and says: you see whit a splendid position we have won for the once
despised Church in America. And his brewers take out their wallets
and brewers' widows open their checkbooks.

     But you do not need to study either history or sociology, and
these people know it. Sex-morals have so little to do with social
welfare that the American civilization, which is the second
greatest (after Russia) in the world is also the most advanced
sexually. It tries to shut out an idealist like Bertrand Russell
for moral turpitude and then has to have a Catholic League of
Decency and other whole armies of amateurs helping the police to
prevent artists and showmen from giving the American people what
they decidedly want. One of these censors would be the first to
paint a terrible picture of the license that would ensue in novels,
magazines. theaters, films, and cabarets if you just left the
purveying to the familiar law of supply and demand. I find American
novels at a decent literary level better than British and much
better than French or German, and at least two-thirds, if not four-
fifths, of them reflect an attitude to sex in the middle-class
readers that is far from puritanical, in spite of such censorship
as there is. The sale of sexological literature confirms this.

     On the other hand the American civilization has some grave
defects which are not found in the Russian. Notoriously there is an
abnormal amount of corruption in business, politics (local and
federal), and juridical and penal circles. There is too high a
proportion of serious crime, too much suffering of the poor and
helpless, too much wanton extravagance of the rich. But do you hear
(he Catholic Church thundering against these evils? Or do you hear
bankers and statesmen applauding it for some crusade against them?
Never. The G-Men made more impression in a year on the real moral
evils which injure civilization than the Church made in a
generation. Tammany, which has been one of the cess-pools of
America for a century has always been, and is, tied up with the
Church. Do not talk to me about Coughlin. Half his followers are
not Catholics, and it is just because he gets some millions of
Americans to respect a priest, and therefore in a vague way the
Church to which he belongs, that the authorities permit for the
present the blatant and -- as has repeatedly been shown --
insincere ravings of the mountebank. Just where he does represent
the Church and violates Justice and decency (in his anti-Semitism
and libeling of Communists) he is neither moral nor a promoter of
the real interests of America.

     For the last few years the sacred fury of the priests has
expended itself in a crusade against Russians and Communism. I
might add the pitiless campaign of lying about democratic Spain as,
although the Catholic laity were divided, the clergy were almost
wholly on the side of the rebel who has murdered thousands in cold
blood and is torturing tens of thousands. But examine the ferocious
attacks on Communism in which the clergy generally carried the 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               19

               THE TYRANNY OF THE CLERICAL GESTAPO

laity with them. To call this a moral crusade is a mockery. The
attempts to justify it by repeating discredited libels from the
London Times were exposed repeatedly yet this had not the least
influence in restraining the Catholic onslaught. Apart from these
bogus outrages the attack was not moral but immoral. A man has as
much right on decent principles and under American law to try to
persuade others that all the means of production ought to be a
national possession and all commodities and services equally shared
as he has to argue for the New Deal or universal conscription -- to
say nothing of a right to poison the minds of children and delude
adults with false statements.

     Whenever You apply a genuine moral test to the work of the
clergy they fail, yet the country grants them an amazing power in
the only respect claimed to be moral but certainly not moral in the
social sense and challenged by some of the best writers in America
and probably at least half the educated class. It is the familiar
Roman story. Claim that you are rendering a service to civilization
by preventing people from seeing a film like The Birth of a Baby or
by getting censors at Hollywood who will cut out a bit of saucy
dialogue (at which the entire audience would break into laughter)
or order the alteration of a bath-room scene, and then when a
writer seriously challenges the utility of the work and the moral
standard of the censors get his book suppressed.

     Indeed in the matter of films the so-called moral censorship
is in large part a pretext for preventing a disturbance of Catholic
propaganda and has been so used in notorious cases. Anyone who has
seen or read G.B. Shaw's Saint Joan knows that, in his usual
defiant way (certainly not for profit) he was attacking
freethinkers and playing to the Catholic gallery. His Inquisition
scene, for instance, was a concession to Catholics at the dire cost
of historical truth. Yet the Catholic censors cracked their whips
and threatened an all-American boycott because it did not represent
as they wanted the official sanctity of Joan. It was much the same
with The Informer, which showed the real combination of cruelty and
piety in the priest-ridden Irish, and with Blockade which exposed
the lies which the priests were telling about the Spanish people.

     It is, however, the principle, the fact that the religious
leaders of about 15,000,000 Americans are allowed to control the
entertainment of the entire population, that matters. It is all the
more exasperating to any man who remembers that in the Catholic
lands of Southern Europe the most licentious spectacles were
permitted by priests (who then did represent the entire community).
In the pious Middle Ages pageants and parodies of the Mass were
permitted in the churches and cathedrals which would make a
Catholic Boston lady faint, and orgies followed on the streets
which, if they were now perpetrated in private, would rouse Irish
policemen to break in with axes and mercilessly beat the audience.
If you can read French, and if there is a copy of it in America,
try to see M. du Tilliot's Memoires pour servir a I'histoire de la
Fete des Foax (1741). The Catholic author, who devoted years to his
inquiry, gives a richly documented account of monstrous scenes that
the clergy permitted (and often took part in) in the cathedrals and
churches of France (and Spain, Germany, etc.) wild orgies on the
streets on "holy" days all through the Ages of Faith. On some of 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               20

               THE TYRANNY OF THE CLERICAL GESTAPO

the illustrations he gives, from banners that had headed
processions on these days, we see men performing in the public
street acts which one of the most distinguished French writers, V.
Marguerite, was expelled from the Academy, at the insistence of the
clergy, twenty years ago for attributing in a novel (La garconne)
as secret practices to a few morbid men and women of the richer
class! Until quite recent times -- for all I know it may still be
true -- spectacles were exhibited semi-publicly -- you had merely
to charge for admission to the room and exclude children -- which
would not have been tolerated in ancient Rome. I often saw myself
when I lived in the South of France, 40 years ago, the poster at
the door announcing such shows as La mademoiselle et l' ane. That
means "The young lady and the donkey," and that is all I dare tell
you about it. In those days the French priests were pale with
indignation because a few morbid folk in Paris were said
(questionably) to attend Black Masses, in great secrecy, but
hundreds of thousands nightly paid to see these really public
shows.

     Here is one more -- I could give scores -- illustration of
this hypocritical delicacy about sex. Until 1878 castrated soprano
singers were used instead of females in many churches (and operas)
of Italy and even in the Papal choir at Rome. This was as notorious
a fact as the venality of Papal officials and was noticed in nearly
every book of travel of visitors. I have met old men who have
lunched and discussed with these eunuchs in Rome. The Encyclopedia
Britannica (article "Eunuchs") continued until the latest edition
to say that these emasculated men "driven long ago from the stage
by public opinion remained the musical glory and the moral shame of
the Papal choir till the accession of Pope Leo XIII." The recent
edition was revised by Catholics, and not only is the reference to
the churches suppressed, but it is audaciously stated that Leo XIII
simply found the custom in vogue in the opera. Clerical writers,
having thus suppressed the most accessible and weighty evidence,
have already begun -- I have had proof in the last few weeks -- to
say that this story is another libel of the Holy Church! But apart
from the unexpurgated earlier editions of the Britannica it is
stated as an ordinary musical fact in Grove's standard Dictionary
of Music ("Soprani") and all the older dictionaries and books on
church-life in Rome. Every Pope, every nun, in Rome knew that the
castrati ("the castrated," as they were commonly called) or soprani
in the Papal and other church choirs were men who had been, for
church purposes, treated as men used to treat each other in the
wildest of the Wild West. Now the Black International wants to
dictate to America on the ground that its Church has an age-old
tradition of extreme delicacy in regard to sex! The claim is even
more preposterous than the shoddy version of history which
attributes the fall of Rome, etc., to sexual freedom. The real aim
is the same as in the furious campaign against Spaniards and
Bolsheviks, the alliance with the Fascist scum of the modern world
the sycophancy to the rich -- care for the power and wealth of the
Black International.







                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               21

               THE TYRANNY OF THE CLERICAL GESTAPO

                           Chapter IV

                  THE SHAME OF THE CONFESSIONAL

     In discussing this catholic censorship of art and
entertainment I have inevitably moved beyond the priest's tyranny
over his own people and considered the outrageous interference of
the Catholic hierarchy with the freedom and tastes of the general
population. If any doubt still lingers in the mind of the reader
about the truth of my statement that the real aim of this is simply
to increase the power and prestige of the Church let him reflect
that the clerical Gestapo has in this respect a power to control
its own subjects which is far greater than the power of other
ministers of religion. A priest may tell you that in claiming a
national censorship his Church merely wants to remove "temptation"
from the eyes of its followers. That again is a hollow claim. Its
real plea is that it is rendering a Service to American
civilization and must therefore be respected as a valuable national
institution. In the domestic sphere the Church boasts that it
enables folk to "resist temptation" far more effectively than any
other Church does. The chief reference here is to its doctrine of
mortal sin and the confessional, and it is an important part of the
tyranny of the spiritual Gestapo.

     Catholic teaching, stamped upon the mind from childhood onward
by myriads of sermons, books, hymns, services, etc., is that some
sins are venial (pardonable or lighter) and some mortal (or
punished with eternal torment unless they are confessed to a priest
and absolution received). Reading books or seeing pictures or shows
that in any degree stir the sexual feelings is declared very
emphatically by the Church to be one of these mortal sins. One
should understand clearly how unique the position of the Catholic
is. He believes that after reading even a passage of a book that
criticizes the faith or the clergy or seeing a film that gives him
a sexual feeling, he is under sentence of eternal damnation and if
he dies suddenly -- a street accident, bombing, heart-failure, etc.
before he has confessed this to a priest he will infallibly and
with no hope whatever of escaping it suffer terrible torture for
all eternity.

     It is well also to understand the position of the Catholic
friend who smiles and tells you that he does not take this
literally. If he does not he rejects the teaching of the Church on
a point which it makes as vital to the creed as the divinity of
Christ or the atonement: more Vital, indeed, since the power of the
priests is based to a far greater extent on the doctrine of hell.
In rejecting or ignoring this dogma a Catholic necessarily rejects
the basic dogma of the teaching authority of the Church and opens
the door wide to general skepticism. He cannot honestly repeat the
simplest form of the Catholic creed and, if he is a writer, he dare
not even remotely hint at his position. is he a Catholic? Please
yourself, but you will have little difficulty in realizing that
this peculiar attitude toward one of the most fundamental dogmas of
the Church is very uncommon in the Catholic body. From the Church
angle the man who says this is in worse plight than the crook or
the fornicator. If he does not act on the belief which he
professes, to reject and confess his sins at least once a year he, 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               22

               THE TYRANNY OF THE CLERICAL GESTAPO

in Catholic theology, may still be a member of the "body" of the
Church but not of its "soul." In plain English he is only a nominal
Catholic and keeps his position for social or other reasons. Any
Catholic who tells you that he is free to question or reject thins
fundamental doctrine lies. He certainly knows better.

     It is through the further doctrines of confession and
indulgences that the Church makes this dogma one of the most
profitable in its theology and the chief source of its despotic
power. People who indolently, or from an amiable ignorance of the
subject, say that the Catholic Church is much the same as any other
are very far astray. The Protestant bows to the commands of the
Lord and what he believes to be doctrines in the New Testament.
Even the Church of England and the Protestant Episcopal Church of
America lay it down in the 39 Articles that the Christian need not
listen to any command or doctrine that is not found in the
Scriptures. But the Roman Church imposes as a binding dogma --
binding under the usual penalty of hell -- that "Commandments of
the Church" are on the same footing as the Ten Commandments. They
put on the same level as an act of grave injustice the failure of
a Catholic to attend Mass on Sunday morning, to abstain from meat
on Friday, or to neglect confession at Easter. The penalty is the
same for murder, adultery, or defrauding the widow or orphan --
hell.

     A pleasant thought, isn't it, that some 10,000,000 adult
American's believe this. Hell and the devil have dominated their
minds from the time when they were in the infant-school. Naturally
there are millions of Protestants who are in the same condition,
but (in no Protestant Church do the authorities say that it is hell
to transgress their commands), in none is a man prevented by
priestly inquisition and periodical confession from taking a more
liberal view. The Church of Rome can deal out sentence of hell and
annul the sentence of hell when it pleases.

     That is the chief root of the strange tyranny I have so far
described. A Catholic apologist would resent the word tyranny. His
people, he would say voluntarily submit to the priest who dictates
what they shall read or not-read, what shows they shall see or not
see, whom and in what conditions they shall marry, and so on. Does
he mean that they like it? Oh. no: but they hold a creed that
reconciles them to the system. And the fundamental article of that
creed is that the Church take's the place of Christ and can condemn
a child of eight years to hell or acquit a man who is as encrusted
with sins as an old ship is with barnacles. It may all sound very
flatulent to you, but you will never understand Catholic life and
action unless you know it.

     This doctrine of hell and its annex, purgatory, is turned into
a source of power and wealth chiefly by the further doctrines of
penance and indulgences. A mortal sin -- for instance, when you
kiss a girl too ardently even for a few seconds -- incurs sentence
of hell instantaneously by an automatic spiritual machinery. All
sorts of things are mortal sins and, though, you may find it
incredible, Catholics believe that the majority of themselves walk
the streets, cheerfully, under the dire sentence. The curse holds
until the act -- in case they have forgotten this fateful act, as 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               23

               THE TYRANNY OF THE CLERICAL GESTAPO

they commonly do, they run over a charming and exhaustive list of
sins (in their prayer-books) before confessing -- is confessed to
a priest and he gives absolution. Theologians, who are really not
quite as obtuse as the gentle lady saint who in a vision saw
Catholics falling every minute "like snowflakes" into hell have
thought out the mitigation that when one is going to die without
the possibility of seeing a priest an act of sorrow will do the
trick. I doubt if many Catholic's know that piece. The only sure
way to escape the sentence is to confess. The obligation is to do
this. once a year, but fraternity rules and custom generally
prescribe once a month.

     Many would like to ask one psychological question about the
mind of a Catholic. Gladys for instance, goes to confession on
February 28 and is not due again until March 31. But she has a date
on March 7 (or 17th especially) and . . . Does she go about in fear
and trembling in the meantime? Not in the least. You must work it
out for yourself but be sure of one thing: Catholics really believe
all this stuff. Nervousness about it is unusual. A priest in a poor
quarter of London told me this experience. I believe it has become
"a story" since I wrote it 45 years ago, but it's true. He was
assisting an Irish laborer, of lurid life, in his last hour and
found the man terribly afraid. When he explained how merciful God
is the man murmured: "It's not 'im, it's the other b____.

     Once the "soul" has gone to hell it is all over. Almost the
one thing which the Pope "cannot do is to get a soul out of hell.
It sounds remarkable but the Catholic way of salvation is almost
fool-proof, and Catholics rarely think about going to hell.
Confession to a priest means that you glance back, in quarter of an
hour or so of preparation, over the month (or year) with the aid of
your list of sins and then tell him which you committed and how
often in each case. One priest I knew used to tell of a bright boy
who, with admirable succinctness, reeled off his load speedily as:
"Thirty b-s, 25 p-s, and 40 d-s. It is not necessary to tell venial
sins, and better-behaved children are often puzzled. A sharp little
girl, of inquiring mind, once accused herself to me -- the reader
probably knows that I was a father-confessor for years -- of
adultery. But of tales of the confessional there would be no end.
See my Twelve Years in a Monastery.

     Another essential difference of Catholicism is that the priest
does not assure the penitent "that God forgives him" or her. He
says, and means "I absolve thee." It was part of the power-policy
of the Church to shape the institution (or sacrament) of penance on
those lines. Confession. to a priest is, of course, an old
religious practice. It was as familiar in ancient Babylonia as it
is in a Catholic country, though the priest did not release from a
sentence of hell, in which no Babylonian believed. Their idea was
that for sin the great God Marduk let the devils have a go at a
man, and it was relief from the tooth-aches, head-aches, belly-
aches, etc., consequent upon sin that he sought. Confession to a
priest was as common in ancient as in modern Mexico.

     But all that must be read elsewhere. The Catholic theory is
that after the priest's magic formula and wave of the hand the
devil retires, baffled, and all that the Catholic has to look
forward to its purgatory. Catholics may assure you that it is one 

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               24

               THE TYRANNY OF THE CLERICAL GESTAPO

of the beauties of their creed that it avoids the stark and inhuman
alternative of hell or heaven for eternity. It says that lighter
sins or those who have escaped hell by confessing must suffer or be
"purified" for a time in purgatory. It is not now essential to
believe that the torture is by fire, though the learned (and very
modern) Thomas Aquinas proved to the hilt that souls could feel
torture by fire, and since it is a spiritual state, there is no
question of time. But the Church finds it hopeless to impress the
dogma without this material terminology. A popular hymn exhorts
Catholics to "Pray for the Holy Souls that burn, This hour amidst
the cleansing flames," and the indulgences which they "win" or buy
speak of shortening the purgatorial punishment by 30 days or 100
days, or abolishing it altogether.

     In short, this purgatory and indulgence business, however
beautiful and humane you may think it, has been the most profitable
religious doctrine that was invented. We need not go back to the
Middle Ages, when indulgences were sold as literally as cigars are,
or think of the sale of them by the millions a year in Spanish
Catholic lands -- no doubt Franco has restored it -- until recent
years. In discussing the Church's finances I said that a Catholic
pays for every Mass that each of the 250,000 priests says every
day, and the aim is usually an indulgence. I described the enormous
traffic in medals, small pictures, relies, scapulars (little
pictures on cloth strung over the shoulders and worn next the
skin), etc. The normal aim of all this is to secure indulgences.
But the subject is too large to be treated here.

     What concerns us more is that the doctrine of hell, of a
barbarously conceived penalty for a sin from which the priest must
absolve a man, is obviously the main source of the power of the
clerical Gestapo. Let us admit that the Roman Church did not invent
the dogma of hell, as it did that of purgatory, and that priests do
not now receive money for absolution, though they assuredly did
this in the Middle Ages. But as a source of power over the laity it
is a doctrine of unrivalled value. The Church could not have any
hope of putting its own commandments in regard to church-
attendance, fasting, marriage, divorce, birth-control, reading
critical literature, etc., on the same footing as the Decalogue if
it had not first lodged the belief in eternal punishment and in its
own right to declare when and how this punishment was incurred In
the mind of the laity.

     Confession is obviously and essentially based upon the dogma.
Unless one appreciates this the spectacle of 10,000,000 Americans
whispering periodically to a priest how many times they Swore or
lied, how many times they just thought that a girl was desirable --
hell drops in with the first thought -- or handled themselves,
seems grotesque. The "liberal" view, that Catholics esteem the
practice because it eases their consciences and gets them spiritual
guidance, is preposterous nonsense. Most Catholics detest the need
of it and, as a rule, hurry through it mechanically. But only the
small minority who are Catholics in name only, for social or
business reasons, shirk it. One of the first questions the visiting
priest asks the mother at Easter time is whether all members of the
family have "been to their Easter duties." The minimum obligation
is confession and communion once a year "and that at Easter or 
there abouts." The priest keeps a tally.

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               25

               THE TYRANNY OF THE CLERICAL GESTAPO

     And the most intriguing feature of the whole business is that
this "sacrament of penance" with its dire obligation to confess to
a priest at least once a year is one of the most obviously priest-
made dogmas in the whole weird structure of Catholic teaching and
discipline. The Christian Church, one of many ascetic developments
of the Greek-Roman world, did assuredly start with a lively concern
about sins. The end of the world and general judgment -- idea which
had been borrowed from the Persians -- were believed to be near at
hand. The practice arose, therefore, of compelling members who had
strayed to confess their sins, generally in the sense of expressing
sorrow for sins which were known to the others, before admitting
them to the mystic supper. Doubtless the "overseer" (bishop) or
presiding "elder" (priest) recited some sort of formula of
absolution. In the 2nd Century, as the idea of priesthood
developed, it was claimed that the clergy could forgive sins, and
a clause in support of this was worked into the New Testament
(Matthew XVI, 19). The next step in the fabrication of the priest's
power was to declare that forgiveness could be obtained only
through the priest's absolution and the laity must be compelled to
ask for it periodically. This was so clearly an ecclesiastical move
that even the people of the Dark Age resisted it, as they resisted
the priestly control of marriage, and there was no law of
compulsory confession until the year 1215, when the truculent and
despotic Innocent III had completed the fabric of ecclesiastical
power.

     It is too large a subject for discussion here, and we are
concerned only to point out how this rounds off the power of the
priest over the laity and gives him an authority and right of
inquisition that the Nazi Gestapo might envy. But one further point
must be noticed briefly.

     Protestant writers insist that the confessional is actually a
corrupting institution while non-Catholic apologists for
Catholicism claim -- they never examine facts -- that it must be an
effective moral agency. In a careful analysis of my experience as
a confessor and of discussions with others I have shown (in my
Twelve Years in a Monastery) that the Protestant contention is, if
certain excesses are struck out, correct to a very wide extent. It
is true that there is no misconduct in the confessional, in which
priest and penitent are separated by a wooden partition, and of
wire grille, but assignations can be made, and the priest often
hears confessions in places where there is no separation. I have
known a priest who systematically got young women to pretend
illness, go to bed, and send for him to come and hear their
confessions. It is rare. More common is the demoralizing effect on
girls and certain types of women of the intimate sexual talk that
is not merely permitted but required by the priest. He cannot pass
a vague self-accusation of a girl that she has been "immodest" (as
the nuns teach her to say) or indecent. He must ask. Does she mean
a solitary act and how far did it go? Was it with another girl or
with a man, and just how far did that go? Was the man married or a
priest? Was it with a dog (not uncommon with certain types) and how
far did that go? If she that she saw a film or read a book he has
to know if the bad thoughts culminated in the usual way, and so on.
Since most priests are normally "fleshy" and the woman is
stimulated by the sort of sacred license the occasion permits her, 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               26

               THE TYRANNY OF THE CLERICAL GESTAPO

any man can guess what the emotional development is likely to be.
The cinema from which the priest is so eager to banish temptation
for the sake of his Catholic girls, rarely reaches the temperature
that the confessional so often does.


                            Chapter V

               CATHOLIC ACTION A CLERICAL MANEUVER

     Writers who find it more convenient to make reflections on the
Church of Rome without making a close study of its history and life
-- it is much easier to pay it compliments in this way --
generously describe it as a vast body of 300,000,000 or
350,000,000, men and women who are devotedly attached to a
"venerable creed" and are therefore bound to have a priesthood and
hierarchy for organizational purposes and to preserve the necessary
discipline. We have seen, or I have shown in a score of works, that
this view is as false as the theory of a Seventh Day Adventist that
the strata of the earth's crust are heaps of rubbish left by the
great Deluge, There are not 50,000,000 lay men and women in the
Catholic world who are old enough and sufficiently educated to be
described as deliberately subscribing to a creed. The vast majority
of the 180,000,000 Catholics are children, illiterates, or semi-
literates; and most of the remainder are duped by a mendacious
literature and fooled by a dogma which prevents them from reading
exposures of its untruth.

     From a sociological viewpoint the Church of Rome is an
economic corporation of some quarter of a million priests, high and
low. It differs from the ordinary economic corporation in the fact
that the 100,000,000 more or less adult lay members are not
shareholders but, as in the propagandist societies, just
subscribing members. And it differs from these propagandist or
idealist bodies and societies very profoundly in the fact that it
holds, and has for centuries proceeded on, the principle that these
subscribing members must be held together by violence as well as
deceit: that they cannot leave it when they profess to believe its
creed no longer but remain subject to it and may be coerced by any
kind of suffering (privation, jail, torture, even death) when the
Church finds it feasible to inflict. Ten years ago you might have
boggled at this conception of the Church of Rome. Very many
Socialists and Communists did, saying that it was a harmless old
wreck and serious people gave all their attention to politico-
economic matter's. Now, in their tens of millions, in penury or a
miserable mental slavery, in jail or in mourning for their dead,
they lie like withered swathes of corn across the planet from
Brazil to Italy.

     preserve this structure the Church of Rome had not only to
lodge certain childish basic dogmas in the minds of the subscribing
members and guard them from the contamination of truth but to draw
a magic line between clergy and laity. It invented the sacrament of
Holy Orders. It erected a sanctuary rail in the chapel. The priests
were officially "holy men," special proteges of the Holy Ghost,
separated from ordinary folk by sacred vows, rights, privileges,
and powers. They talked to you from a pulpit as if you were 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               27

               THE TYRANNY OF THE CLERICAL GESTAPO

children and ordered you to do this and that as if you were slaves.
If you laid a hand on one -- if you came home unexpectedly and
caught him, let us say, at your special bottle -- it was the
terrible crime of sacrilege. They could not be taken to a common
court of law or asked to pay taxes. To ask them to show annual
balance-sheets would be an outrage. Your business was to pay and be
meek.

     The laity were always apt to be restive under this system. In
the earlier part of the Middle Ages the Romans themselves fought
the Popes off and on for two centuries for the right to govern
themselves. Everywhere, as I said, they resisted priestly attempts
to control marriage or impose such laws as compulsory confession.
Princes and nobles defied the clergy hundreds of times, but by the
terrors of excommunication and interdict the clergy worked on the
illiterate masses and won. By the 19th Century these terrors were
as vapid as those of the haunted house or the comet, and the
historic disintegration of the old Church began. The success of
science in mastering disease and death led to a rapid increase of
population, but even this could not be made to conceal the fact
that the Church was losing about a million members a decade. Slowly
and reluctantly the clergy had to turn to new methods, and one of
these, particularly during the last 20 years, is what is called
Catholic Action. Some call it Catholicism with a punch, others a
cooperation of laity and clergy. It is a combination of the two.

     The laity began to take action long before the late Pope
organized this new movement or tendency. The fight of the German
Catholics against Bismarck was mainly conducted by the laity. The
militant Christian Socialism of that county and Austria was
Catholic Action. France had several powerful lay movements in the
19th Century, and a Papal Delegate was sent to America to curb the
laity long before Pope Leo XIII, in 1899, gave a public and severe
snub to the American bishops for their innovations. However, it is
usually said, the Catholic laity won the right of personality, and
in Catholic Action they march side by side with the priests, no
longer mere contributors but militant and largely self-governing
bodies.

     Not quite. Catholic Action does not mean either that the
priests were forced to make concessions or that their tyranny is
less. To a larger extent it was not a new movement but a
coordination of developments due to the requirements of modern
life. The multiplication of schools and in so many countries the
exclusion of nuns and religious brothers from them caused the
appearance of a vast army of Catholic teachers, and, since the
Catholic school is, as I said, really a chapel, these men and women
formed a kind of "Third Estate," a body more or less intermediate
between the clergy and the laity. The development of Catholic
journalism created another large body of active workers in the
cause of the Church. Already the Church made considerable use of
Catholic journalists in the employment of the ordinary press, of
teachers in non-Catholic schools or education departments, of local
politicians, of civil servants in all branches of the national
administration, and so on. Lay Catholicism already was militant.
Even ordinary folk, especially women, could be wound up to make it
a very spirited fight in the few weeks before an election when 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               28

               THE TYRANNY OF THE CLERICAL GESTAPO

there was question of granting larger subsidies to Catholic
schools. Some day the question of the taxation of Church property
will be raised and you will see high-pressure Catholic Action
during election-campaigns. Most of the women would sell America to
Japan if concentration on "the danger to the Church" were to imply
this.

     The present movement is an extension and organization of all
this. All sorts of existing elements were brought together. In
America the Catholic young men's National Union goes back to 1875,
and the monstrous Catholic Welfare Conference, the National Council
of Catholic Men, the National Council of Catholic Women, the
Knights of Columbus (800,000 strong), etc., go back 20 or more
years. Now we have organizations of Catholic Nurses, Teachers,
Actors, Writers, Sociologists, youth, and all sorts of oddments:
Holy Name Societies, Dames of the Grail, the Sword of the Spirit.
the Knights of America, etc. etc., All with horn-rimmed secretaries
and organizers, some with elaborate staffs in Washington or Radio
Hours; and back of all a vast network of newspapers and the
billion-dollar treasury of the Church. It is estimated that more
than 5,000,000 zealous adults, apart from the clergy, are organized
for Catholic Action in America and greatly fancy themselves as
soldiers of the Church.

     I had almost described them as the Shock Troops of the great
campaign to Make America Catholic, but overt action is not their
usual line. Quiet, stealthy, conspiratorial action best suits the
situation. A city must find itself in the grip of the Church before
it perceives the white fingers closing round it. The Knights of
Columbus are quite ready to crack skulls at a Birth Control
Conference or a public meeting to tell the truth about Spain or
Russia, but they are just as ready to conspire with Wall Street to
bring on a war to annex Mexico or for a peaceful penetration of
Canada. During a tour of that Dominion I learned that they had
secretly initiated the Premier of Quebec to their ranks.
Journalists (on non-Catholic papers), civil servants, librarians,
councilors on library or education committees, etc., quietly
consult the interests of the Church. A London daily was pained to
discover that an important member of its staff altered cables in
favor of the Church before publication. Another has a sub-editor
who controls the correspondence columns in the same interest. The
zealous 5,000,000 fill America with such intrigue. It is publicly
stated by American writers that Farley used the influence of his
genial personality to prevent Roosevelt from lifting the rather
disgraceful Spanish Embargo; but I should doubt if the more elegant
dames of the movement go as far as the aristocratic French lady
who, notoriously, seduced Radical statesmen in the preparation of
the shame of France and triumph of its Church.

     So the tail comes to wag the dog. Catholics in America are
about one-tenth of the whole community -- somewhere in this series
of books I will provide the material for a reasonable judgment on
that point -- yet they have such power that the average American
imagines they must be about one-fourth. They are just, as a body,
the shrunken remainder of the vast body of descendants of the 




                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               29

               THE TYRANNY OF THE CLERICAL GESTAPO

Irish, Italian, Polish, German, Czech, French, and other immigrants
of the last 100 years. And they set up in business at Washington 
and insist that the President in his decisions shall ask them for
the Catholic view of the matter!

     In other countries except Britain, where Catholic Action is
much the same as in America but more subterranean and less
effective, Catholic Action is generally Fascist. In Germany Hitler
has killed it very dead. In France, Belgium, Holland, Austria, and
Czecho-Slovakia it worked zealously for the triumph of the Nazi-
Papal plot. In Spain and Portugal, and now in Belgium and France,
it is entirely Fascist or Vichy, which is the same thing. A
correspondent just gets a letter through to me from a Portuguese
town and says that Catholic Action and Fascism are identical, hold
their meetings in the churches, and get anybody who criticizes them
sent to jail or penal colonies. Seldes describes the ghastly
medieval tortures that are used on such critic's today in the jails
of Portugal, under fanatical Catholic Salazar, who gets nothing but
compliments in the American-British democratic press.

     That, in the light of the "great" encyclical (Quadragesimo
Anno.) of the late (assisted by the present) Pope, is the appointed
final phase of Catholic Action. The Catholic young men boast that
the priests, instead of exercising a tyranny over them, now welcome
them as co-workers, are fooled. The bishops ultimately control the
policy of every branch. The Gestapo preside at every meeting of the
plotters. When Catholic Action in France some years before the war
became a powerful royalist-Fascist movement on lines in harmony
with Vatican policy, the Pope scattered it by condemning its
leader's. This was part of a deal of the Vatican with the French
government. When Catholic Action in Italy took the form of a
Catholic democratic movement and became strong enough to stand up
to the Fascists (often physically), the Pope obliged Mussolini by
driving its priest-leader, Sturzo, into oblivion and paralyzing the
movement. German Catholics complain that the Pope betrayed Catholic
Action in their country to Hitler. Make no mistake about it. The
priest rules Catholic Action. The American zealots ought to have
realized it when they were taught to respect Japan as the Pope's
ally, when they were lashed to fury against democratic Spain and
Soviet Russia, when they found themselves rubbing shoulders at
their fervid demonstrations with Germans and Italians who have been
branded as conspirator's and Irish and French who are not much
better.

     But in a later book on the Church and democracy we will
consider this antithesis of democratic pretensions and real aims in
American Catholicism. Catholics are the most priest-ridden of all
peoples of the civilized world: American Catholics are the most
priest-ridden in America. They take orders from their clerical
Gestapo as no other religious bodies do. The priests dictate their
schooling, reading, entertainment, courtship, marriage, diet on
certain days, and every aspect of their lives that can be brought
under the broad heading of morals. It is not submission to
dictation, they say, but compliance with a creed of the truth of
which we are convinced. Who gave you the creed? The Gestapo. Have
you thoroughly and critically examined it? No, the Gestapo forbid.
Why not test the word of your Gestapo by reading a few critics in 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               30

               THE TYRANNY OF THE CLERICAL GESTAPO

defiance of them? We might lose our faith, and that would be
terrible. Why? The Gestapo says so. This reminds us of the story of
the man who, confronted with a difficulty, got under himself and
carried himself across!

















                          ****     ****



    Reproducible Electronic Publishing can defeat censorship.



   The Bank of Wisdom is a collection of the most thoughtful,
scholarly and factual books. These computer books are reprints of
suppressed books and will cover American and world history; the
Biographies and writings of famous persons, and especially of our
nations Founding Fathers. They will include philosophy and
religion. all these subjects, and more, will be made available to
the public in electronic form, easily copied and distributed, so
that America can again become what its Founders intended --

                 The Free Market-Place of Ideas.





                          ****     ****

   The Bank of Wisdom is always looking for more of these old,
hidden, suppressed and forgotten books that contain needed facts
and information for today. If you have such books please contact
us, we need to give them back to America.

                          ****     ****







                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               31


                        30 page printout

    Reproducible Electronic Publishing can defeat censorship.

          This file, its printout, or copies of either
          are to be copied and given away, but NOT sold.

          Bank of Wisdom, Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201

                          ****     ****

Edited by E. Haldeman-Julius

THE BLACK INTERNATIONAL                 No. 13

                  ROME PUTS A BLIGHT ON CULTURE

            THE ROMAN CHURCH, THE POOREST IN CULTURE
                      AND RICHEST IN CRIME

                        by Joseph McCabe

                  HALDEMAN-JULIUS PUBLICATIONS
                     GIRARD  -- : --  KANSAS

                          ****     ****

   CHAPTER

     I    Who Are the Catholic 300,000,000 .................... 1

    II    The Minimum of Scholarship and Maximum of Crime ..... 9

   III    Rome Loves the Poor Illiterate ..................... 18

    IV    The Myth of Its Patronage of Learning .............. 24

                          ****     ****

                            Chapter I


                WHO ARE THE CATHOLIC 300,000,000?

     It occurred to me while I was revising the manuscript of the
preceding book that most readers would like to have, before I
proceed further, a full and clear statement of the grounds on which
I challenge, in fact disdainfully reject, the total numbers of
Catholics in the world that are usually given. These numbers vary
in Catholic writers and standard works of reference from
250,000,000 to nearly 400,000,000. The figure given in the new
Encyclopedia Americana by a Catholic expert is 294,583,000. The
figure in the Catholic Directory, which may be described as an
official publication of the British Catholic authorities, is
398,277,000. Authoritative works of reference, which take amazing
pains to ascertain exactly how many tons of steel are produced
annually in, or tons of rice imported into, the United States give
world-totals which similarly differ from each other by tens of
millions when they turn to "the venerable Church of Rome."



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               1

                  ROME PUTS A BLIGHT ON CULTURE

     Does it matter? Yes, it matters very seriously for three
reasons. First, these big figures are an essential part of the
bluff which priests put up when they claim, as they do in America,
special consideration and privileges for their Church. Secondly,
they are an important part of the deception which these priests
practice on their own followers, since they give, and are intended
to give, Catholics a vague impression that their creed has not
merely been that of the civilized world for fifteen centuries but
is endorsed by the largest body of men and women in the leading
countries of the modern world. Thirdly, the publication of these
figures by Catholic writers and authorities affords a rich
illustration of that recklessness and untruthfulness of statement
which it is the aim of these booklets to expose.

     The Church of Rome knows within very much closer limits how
many members it has. Every priest makes an annual report to his
bishops -- I have assisted in this job -- and these reports provide
national totals which are forwarded to Rome. Two things, amongst
others, are reported: how many Catholics in the loose sense --
baptized persons -- there are in the parish and, particularly, how
many of them are real Catholics as testified by attendance at
church on Sundays and the number of confessions at Easter. But
neither local prelates nor the Vatican ever publish these results.
The nearest approach to an official international annual is Orbis
Catholicus, and it gives no world-total; though if you add up the
statements for each country the total runs to about 350,000,000.

     The sum-total is therefore usually compiled by an entirely
dishonest method, but even professors of sociology who include the
Churches as socially valuable agencies never condemn this.
Countries which, from geographical or historical conditions, never
accepted the Reformation are still called Catholic countries, and
the whole population is usually included in the Catholic total or
only from 1 to 5 percent is allowed for Protestants, Jews, and --
though they generally form the largest body -- skeptics. These
countries (France and its colonies, Italy, Spain and its former
colonies, Portugal and its colonies, Spanish America, and generally
Austria), with a total population of more than 200,000,000 make the
bulk of the Catholic figure. For other countries the figures are
equally fantastic. The Catholic writer in the Encyclopedia
Americana gives 11,000,000 to Russia, where no Catholic claims more
than 3,000,000 and there are now certainly not 300,000: 39,000,000
to Austria and Hungary, which have had for quarter of a century a
total (mixed) population of only 15,000,000: 24,000,000 to Germany,
where the Church is in ruins: 35,000,000 to France, which is at
least five times too much.

     In examining these figures we must clearly understand the
conditions. What is a Catholic or a member of the Roman Church? The
Canon Law is simple and peremptory: everybody who once received
Catholic baptism. American Catholic writers are uneasy about this
arrogant theory of their Church that you cannot secede from it, and
they are shifty and evasive in defining what they mean when they
claim that there are more than 26,000,000 Catholics in the United
States. In a fantastic -- Catholics call it a scientific -- work,
Has the Immigrant Kept the Faith? (1925), Fr. G. Shaugnessy says
that by Catholic he means one who has received Catholic baptism, 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               2

                  ROME PUTS A BLIGHT ON CULTURE

marries in the Church and has his children baptized, and at death
receives the last sacraments. He at once admits that the third
condition is "rather theoretical" -- he is perfectly aware that it
is not taken into account -- and he ought to know, and probably
does know, that Irish, Italian, and other Catholics commonly marry
in the Church and allow the mothers or relatives to have the
children baptized though they have definitely abandoned it. From
quotations given in Moore's 'Will America Become Catholic?' (1931)
it appears that in Catholic periodicals Fr. Shaugnessy, a professor
at a Catholic college, is accustomed to give the usual definition
of a Catholic: one who was baptized in infancy. This is the strict
law of the Church, and it is the guiding principle of the priests
who compile the parochial statistics from which the national and
world-totals are compiled.

     Now we have no objection to Catholics making fools of
themselves by repeating "Once a Catholic always a Catholic," which
entails that in their opinion I, whom they call "the bitterest
enemy" of the Church, am a Catholic. Hoodwinked as they are, they
do not see that the real purpose of the Church in laying down this
seemingly extravagant proposition is so that when a country which
had disowned the Church and has been reduced by violence, as so
often happened in the 19th Century and has happened in a score of
countries today, it can break the rebels by jail, torture, or
execution. They are its subjects. We do not blame Catholics for not
knowing that, but at least, we can expect them to say, when they
boast that there are 20,000,000 Catholics in America and
300,000,000 in the world, that they include tens of millions who
though baptized in infancy, rejected the creed when they grew to
manhood or womanhood. We shall see presently cases in which
Catholic American bishops and canonists have incited priests
deliberately to include these seceders in their statistics.

     The general public, in short, is grossly deceived, and is
meant to be deceived. In common honesty and common sense "members
of a Church" means men, women, and children who accept its creed,
are in touch with its local organization, and more or less
regularly attend its services. What I have said in earlier books --
what I have proved by official statistics -- about the spread, for
instance, of atheistic Communism and Socialism in the last 20 years
shows that at least 50,000,000 adults who are included in the
figure of 300,000,000 loathed and despised the Church and creed as
long as they were free to express their sentiments. But apart from
these there are, especially in America, millions of others who have
thought their way out of the creed and quietly severed their
connection with the Church.

     The only real test is attendance at church. There are two
vital differences to bear in mind in comparing Protestant and
Catholic statistics. Many Churches do not baptize children and by
"members" they mean the adolescent and adult, but the Church of
Rome counts babies a week old. The second difference is that a man
may be a genuine member of a Protestant Church yet attend the
services very irregularly. A Catholic cannot. He is, unless there
is "grave reason" (illness, etc., not a social engagement or
tiredness.), bound to attend every Sunday morning as stringently as
he is prohibited adultery and much more stringently than he is 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               3

                  ROME PUTS A BLIGHT ON CULTURE

forbidden to lie, get drunk, be cruel, or rob this neighbor. It is
only a rare and abnormal type of mind that, holding this belief,
can miss Mass Sunday after Sunday -- hell every time. though the
sentences run concurrently since they are eternal -- for frivolous
reasons; and to question the law is to question the authority of
the Church or the whole distinctive structure of Catholic teaching.
Thus the distinction between "practicing" and "non-practicing" (or
floating") Catholics is a mere trick of apologists to excuse
dishonest statistics.

     Now take the various national constituents of the grand total
of 300,000,000 or 350,000,000; and, as all these figures refer to
the period before Papal-Fascism destroyed freedom in a score of
countries, we need not worry about the obscure situation in France,
Spain, etc., today. France is, in all these totals, credited with
39,000,000 or 40,000,000 Catholics in a total population of
41,000,000. It is amazing how American Catholics swallow this.
Until the political alliance of the Vatican and the French
government began in 1919, on the Church's promise to curb rebellion
in Alsace-Lorraine, Rome had thundered against that "government of
Jews and Freemasons" for 50 years. It had ruined the Church in
France and defied the Pope's. And it had the vast majority of the
people with it, since, in free elections, the Catholics could
hardly get a deputy, much legs a statesman, in Congress. French
culture was solidly anti-Roman. Its hundreds of scientific men were
nearly all Atheists -- even Pasteur, Fabre, and Bernard were not
Catholics -- and of its leading writers nine-tenth's were anti-
Roman.

     But I need not labor the point. Reviewing the position
carefully in 1937, after 18 years of the Catholic influence of
Alsace-Lorraine and the government's encouragement of the Church,
-- I found French Catholic writers agreed with me. Andre Goddard
(Le surnaturel contemporain, 1922) described his country as
overwhelmingly irreligious and said that in no other age had
Frenchmen been "so little interested in the truth." Georges Goyau
(L'effort catholique dans la Franee d'aujourdhui, 1922) gave an
account of all the supposed triumphs of his Church in France since
1919 (so much admired in the American Catholic press) and finally
left it open "whether there are in France today ten million
practicing Catholics, as some say, or only five million, as others.
say." Denis Gwynn, a strictly orthodox Irish writer and, as an
important foreign correspondent in Paris a high authority, agreed
with Goyau and distrusted the higher figure of 10,000,000. This
agrees with my finding after a severe analysis of the evidence in
my 'Decay of the Church of Rome' (1909). I said that there were
5,000,000 to 6,000,000 Catholics in France. The eminent French
authority on religion P. Sabatier insists that I was too generous:
that the figure was 4,000,000. The incorporation of Alsace-Lorraine
in 1919 raised my figure to 7,000,000, and this is supported by the
Catholics Goyau and Gwynn. Now that Alsace and Lorraine have gone
the figure drops again to between 5,000,000 and 6,000,000. Take the
more generous figure. We strike off, with the leading Catholic
experts in agreement, 33,000,000 from the number of French
Catholics in the world-total.




                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               4

                  ROME PUTS A BLIGHT ON CULTURE

     Of Germany I have written so mush recently that I will be
brief. There never were in Germany the 24,000,000 Catholics claimed
in Orhis Catholicus and the Americana. The election-figures and
explanations which I gave in the First Series of these booklets
proved that beyond question Catholics were one-seventh, not one-
third, of the adult community or, including children a little more
generously, about 10,000,000 to 12,000,000. Catholic papers which
I quoted admit that they are far less today, but we will avoid the
present compared period. The 24,000,000 German Catholics included
in a world-total of 300,000,000 or more were not in reality more
than 12,000,000. We strike off a further 12,000,000, or, if the
biggest Catholic figure is pressed upon us, we strike off
20,000,000 on the ground of indisputable facts and statistics.

     The Italians (42,000,000) are "practically all Catholics,"
Says the Orbis, though the Americana claims only 32,000,000.
Strange how these mighty Catholic majorities are so helpless
politically until some Nazi or Fascist thug is called in Italy had
for 50 years (from 1870 onward) a government and a monarchy which
were under the ban of excommunication. I traveled all over Italy in
1904 as a delegate to a Congress of Freethinkers, and my yellow
ticket evoked friendly smiles and reductions of price everywhere:
except, I regret to say at the Vatican. Nine-tenths of the leading
novelists, poets, and dramatists as well as the scientists were as
in France, Freethinkers. . . . But enough. The electoral figures I
gave in No. 1 of the Appeal to Reason prove that at the time when
innocent foreigners were talking about 40,000,000 Catholic Italians
they were not more than a third of the population. Strike off at
least 20,000,000 (Liberals, Socialists, and Communists) from the
grand total.

     The case of Spain ought to be still easier. but when a non-
Catholic writer like Seldes assures America that all are Catholics
in Spain except 100,000 we wonder. At the time when Seldes said
this (The Catholic Crisis, 1939) an anti-ecclesiastical government,
established at one free election after another in spite of the
hysterical curses of the hierarchy, had ruled Spain and defied the
Pope and Church for five years, and it took the sweepings of
Europe, assisted by a British Society for Non-Intervention (or for
Protecting Intervention) and an American Embargo, to put Humpty
Dumpty back on the wall, where he wobbles until the day of freedom
returns. The Irish Jesuit -- and if you know anything more orthodox
come up and see me some time -- Fr. Gannon said in the Irish Times,
January 23, 1937, that there are in Spain "ten or fifteen million
Catholics." Split the difference and say 12,000,000, mostly
belonging to the illiterate 40 percent of the nation, and strike
another 15,000,000 off the Catholic total for Europe.

     In that total the Americana counts 26,060,000 for Austria and
13,000,000 for Hungary. The Catholic writer is, of course, aware
that this is a reference -- and not accurate even as such -- to the
population of Austria-Hungary before 1919. Nearly 20 years before
he wrote this article Austria had been reduced to a population of
7,000,000 and Hungary to one of 9,000,000. In Austria, moreover,
the Socialists had been in the majority and held power in Vienna
and several other cities for years, so that the Catholics, mostly
peasants, were not 93 percent (Orbis) of the population but, 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               5

                  ROME PUTS A BLIGHT ON CULTURE

certainly not more than two-thirds. In Hungary, which recoiled into
Fascism after the unfortunate Communist episode, they are not
13,000,000 but are officially returned as 65 percent of the actual
population or 6,000,000. Deduct a further 12,000,000.

     In Russia, which the Orbis significantly overlooks, the
Americana audaciously claims 11,000,000 Roman Catholics! How the
... you ask. It is like so many frauds, simple. The Catholic writer
refer's -- and again inaccurately -- to the Russia of more than 20
years earlier, when it ruled Poland. Well, you may say, any man of
common sense will allow for that, but you do not see the point. The
Americana says that Catholics number 294,000,000 today and through
this geographical shuffle is able to count many twice. We shall see
a very pretty specimen of this pious work presently.

     Belgium (population 8,000,000) is credited with 7,000,000
Catholics (Americana) or "most of the people" (Orbis). I lived (as
a monk) for a year there, and the Belgian friars forbade me to
appear in my robes on the streets of Brussels as the ensuing
blasphemy would be painful. This was 45 years ago, and the
Catholics have waged an even battle with the contemptuously anti-
Catholic Liberals and Socialists ever since until the devout Hitler
murdered the Church's critics for it. Portugal (7,000,000) is said
to be "mostly" Catholic. As it is still 50 percent illiterate I
would not mind much, but the fact is that it kicked out its
Catholic king 32 years ago and kept its angry Church to heel until
the butcher Salazar joined the Butchers Union of Europe. Czecho-
Slovakia (15,000,000 until 1939) is described in the Orbis as 80
percent Catholic. Turn over No 5 of the last series and see how the
leading Catholic weekly in Britain acknowledged a loss of 2,000,000
in five years after 1919. The Church was in ruins until Hitler's
salvage Corps set it up again in Slovakia, one of the most
illiterate regions of Europe.

     But we need not run over all these smaller countries. The
Americana says that there are 183,000,000 Catholics in Europe. How
consoling to Americans! But on the safest of grounds -- full
particulars and authorities in earlier numbers -- we have had to
strike off something like 100,000,000 of these and in the next
chapter we shall see the quality of what is left. Let us first get
the number.

     We turn to America, and here the writers in the Americana
ought to be careful and conscientious because, while the
Encyclopedia is weak culturally, it is great on American
statistics. He says that there are 50,000,000 Catholics in North
America and 44,000,000 in the South. Not being an American I have
to be modest, but as the population of South America is about
90,000,000 and half its inhabitants are illiterate, I should be
inclined to grant it at least 50,000,000 Catholic's. On the other
hand, even if we grant the 20,000,000 Catholics demanded in the
States and the 4,500,000 claimed in Canada, and the 14,000,000
claimed in Mexico, I hardly see how they amount, even in Catholic
arithmetic, to 50,000,000. Pray do not be impatient with my little
jokes. I am showing you how the Catholic total is made up.

 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               6

                  ROME PUTS A BLIGHT ON CULTURE

     To claim 90 percent (Orbis) of the Mexicans is, in view of the
notorious political development of recent years, so fatuous that I
won't linger over it. Yes, I am quite aware that any sensible
Catholic will admit that, but does he realize that the grand
Catholic total which he flourishes is based upon such tricks? South
America, on the other hand, is too big a field to cover here. I
will be content to claim that in earlier booklets I have shown that
the middle-class is substantially skeptical though outwardly more
reverent to the Black International since it entered into a
definite and highly respectable alliance with Fascism; and that the
very rapid spread of Communism after 1920 took some tens of
millions of the urban and industrial workers out of the Church.
Nine-tenths of the population of 90,000,000 are usually claimed in
the Catholic total, and at least 20,000,000 must be subtracted.

     It is of greater interest here to examine the situation in the
United States. Let us first get a clear general idea what
Catholicism in America means. It consists of immigrants from Europe
(and partly from Quebec and Mexico) and their descendants. And in
this connection I have to notice the funny and learned book of
Father Professor Shaugnessy,'Has the Immigrant Kept the Faith?'
(1925). The zealous priest had noticed that a dozen Catholic
authorities asserted that there has been a monstrous secession --
their estimates vary from 15,000,000 to 25,000,000 -- from the
Church of these immigrants and their descendants, and he sets out
to rebuke all this nonsense by a "scientific" analysis of the
official statistics. He does not condescend to notice that I
published a severe analysis of these figures in 1909 and proved
that there was a leakage of over 15,000,000. Even in his lengthy
and learned-looking bibliography my book is not mentioned. That is
how Catholics are treated even by their "professors." But I will
not imitate his rudeness by ignoring his book.

     He proves triumphantly that the immigrants have kept the faith
and that there has been no serious leakage, but one illustration of
his method will suffice here. In a final summary table he gives the
number of immigrants between 1820 and 1920 as 14,592,613 from
"Catholic countries" and 19,062,190 from "non-Catholic countries."
You at once notice something peculiar. In the former category he
includes only 165,000 Poles, and he must have known that in 1920
there were, according to the official census, 284,000 persons in
New York and Chicago alone who had been actually born in Poland!
Surely, you will say, everybody knows that there have been millions
of Catholic Polish immigrants. Observe the cleverness of Catholic
science. Before 1920 there was no Poland. The country was mainly
under Russia, and Russia is a "non-Catholic" country, so the
immigrants are all put under Russia. Germany again, which sent
nearly a fourth of the immigrants, is a "non-Catholic" country. But
during that period it was one-third Catholic, and its immigrants
came predominantly from Catholic provinces. In fine, if you add the
millions of Catholic German and Polish immigrants to the total from
Catholic countries (taking off a small percentage for non-
Catholics) you get well over 20,000,000 Catholic immigrants; and
since the majority of these came in between 50 and 100 years ago
they ought now to number between 40,000,000 and 50,000,000! "Where
are the snows of yesteryear?"



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               7

                  ROME PUTS A BLIGHT ON CULTURE

     Apart from these little oddities of apologetic literature
American Catholic statistics are weird and wonderful. In the last
edition of the Encyclopedia Britannica, which was revised by
Catholic's in order to secure accuracy about their Church, it is
said that the "official figure" for the year 1928 was 19,689,049 --
the Catholic Press Directory said 21,453,928 -- the "generally
accepted" figure, 22,733,254, and the "true" figure 25,000,000.
Observe the accuracy down to a unit of most of these figures,
though they differ from each other by millions. However, the
"official" figure in the latest census of religions, after ten
year's of glorious fertility of Irish, Polish, Italian, and German
Catholic families, a fair amount of further immigration, and half
a million converts, is 19,914,937, and the Orbis Catholicus,
Encyclopedia Americana, and Catholic Directory are content with
20,000,000. Catholic statistics in America are farcical and their
"remarkable growth," as Catholic officials in the Census Bureau are
allowed to call it, is a myth. Even their own figures do not show
the Church growing, in spite of its higher birth rate, at the same
pace as the general population.

     How many really are there? They do not know themselves. The
official (Census) figure is made up of claims by the priests and
the bishops. The egregious Fr. Shaugnessy goes so far as to say
that the parish priests often deliberately understate (which means
lie about) the number of their parishioners so that the bishop will
not be tempted to split the parish (and -- the apologist does not
say this -- halve the income of the priest). What a disreputable
suggestion! I mean, the priests do notoriously lie, or, inflate the
numbers, but it is for the glory of the Church and is covered by
the canonical principle that a seceder is still a Catholic.

     I made a very thorough study of the matter, following upon the
analysis of official statistics in my Decay of the Church of Rome
(1909), in No. 1 of the Appeal to Reason Library (ch. 5, 1925).
There I give Catholic evidence, largely taken from J.F. Moore's
useful book 'Will America Become Catholic?', (1931), that priests
do in fact, and are sometimes so advised by the bishops, deceive
the public by counting lapsed as actual Catholics. A check on their
figures in Milwaukee showed that they claimed 10,000 Italians and
only 1,000 of them attended church. In another city 28 percent of
the supposed Catholics never went to church: in a third city 42
percent: in a fourth 38 percent. There is abundant evidence that at
least one-third must be deducted from official figures. The number
of children in Catholic primary schools confirms this. The Black
International may object that they have not schools for all their
children, but this weakness is offset by the fact that in the
cities very large numbers quit the Church during the post-school
years. The main fact to bear in mind is, however, the emphatic
Catholic law and teaching that baptized persons whether they
profess to have rejected the creed or not, are members of the
Church and must be entered in its statistics.

     Let us still be generous and take off only one-quarter: a very
modest deduction when we remember that the claims of these priests
for other countries are as we saw, exaggerated by from 100 to 600
percent. There are not more than 15,000,000 genuine Catholics in
America. There are possibly not more than 13,000,000 or one-tenth 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               8

                  ROME PUTS A BLIGHT ON CULTURE

of the population. The world-total of Catholics is not 390,000,000
or 290,000,000. It is not 200,000,000 and is probably round about
180,000,000. These are the contributing members of an economic
corporation the governing caucus of which at Rome, apart from the
national branches, gets something like a billion dollars a year,
and largely in American money, for its international plotting and
for the comfort of the Italian hierarchy.


                           Chapter II

                 THE MINIMUM OF SCHOLARSHIP AND
                      THE MAXIMUM OF CRIME

     My London papers report today (March 13) that "Washington has
protested to the Vatican 'because it is encouraging' a Jap Bid to
Stir up Trouble." What precisely the State Department objects to is
not clear but the public is informed that it is to "the
establishment of relations between Japan and the Holy See, as asked
for by Tokyo." Those relations were, as I have repeatedly
explained, established year's ago. Five years ago I told how the
Vatican entered into friendly relations with Japan after the
Manchurian outrage (1931), when it was vital to the future of
civilization that the bandits should be condemned and punished by
the whole world, and how the friendship ripened into a cordial
diplomatic alliance (1935) with exchange of ambassadors and the
most graceful courtesies, exactly in proportion as the Japs sank
deeper into crime and corruption. In booklets (No. 2 and No. 4) of
the first series on the Black International I traced the whole
story and told from the Pope's own newspaper, how one of the vilest
of Japanese agents Matsuoka, fresh from the final meeting of the
bloody conspirators in Berlin (1941), was received with special
honor and warmth at the Vatican and granted a gold medal by the
Pope.

     And the press would now like us to believe that after ten
years of this unconcealed courtship Washington has just discovered,
presumably through its Secret Service, that the Japs have
approached the Vatican! What is really wrong about the matter? Very
certainly Washington knew every step in the development of the
relations of the Vatican and the Japs, and there must have been few
editorial offices of any importance in the United States in which
they were not known. Why were they concealed from the public or
mentioned only in obscure paragraphs as items of little
significance?

     We are not fanatical and do not ascribe every evil of our time
to the Black International. The interest's of trade had a good deal
to do with the suppression of discussion as far as Japan is
concerned. But there was little to discuss in Japan seeking an ally
in Europe. The monstrous thing was the closer and closer approach
of the Vatican to Japan as it strode foully and bloodily from one
province of China to another. Can there be the slightest doubt that
one of the advantages the Japs sought in the alliance was that the
Catholic influence should counteract in all countries, and
particularly in America, the growing concern of serious people at
their aggressions! That, at all events, is what happened.


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               9

                  ROME PUTS A BLIGHT ON CULTURE

     It is one illustration of the evil that is done by the Black
International in America in putting its own interests before
national interests or those of the race. The aspect of this that
concerns us here is that press and politicians say that the Church
of Rome is so important an institution in America that they are
bound to consult its wishes and are naturally reluctant to see
anything wrong in its proceedings. Most of us will not accept the
apology. Many American papers told in 1935 how the Vatican and
Tokyo were arranging an alliance; and many others told in the same
year how Japan seethed with patriotic societies, some of them two
to three million strong, which demanded the expulsion of all
Americans and Europeans from Asia, and how tableaux depicting just
such a destruction of part of the American fleet as occurred
recently in Pearl Harbor were publicly exhibited to jubilant crowds
in the chief streets of the cities. But there were no editorials or
feature articles pointing out the connection such as there were
denouncing Russia. The world-press bears a terrible share of the
responsibility for the world-tragedy; and one reason is that it is
to a lamentable extent under the influence of the Catholic Church.

     One of the chief aims of the present series of booklets is to
show that in submitting to this influence the press took the Church
at its own valuation yet could, if it had taken half the trouble it
takes over an obscure murder, have discovered that the valuation is
monstrously false. We have now seen this as far as the size of the
Church is concerned. There are not 25,000,000, not 20,000,000, but
something less than 15,000,000 Catholics in America. The Pope has
not 390,000,000 but less than 200,000,000 subjects. Seeing,
however, that the chief excuse given for subservience to the Roman
Church is that it contributes materially to American civilization,
it is still more important to examine the quality of the Pope's
subjects.

     We have already seen the hypocrisy of the Roman claim of moral
influence. The priests are very eloquent about sex-matters, in
regard to which Catholics do not appear to be different from other
folk, while the theories of ancient history with which they try to
prove a connection between sexual freedom and the decay of
civilization ought not to impress even a politician. Of the evils
which do deeply affect the social welfare -- crime, corruption, and
greed -- they take no effective notice. They are, in fact, amongst
the stoutest defenders of the greed which forbids the full
development of our resources and the betterment of the condition of
the mass of the people.

     But the cultural pretensions of the Roman Church are even
worse. It puts, and has always put, a blight on the higher culture
which assuredly is a valuable element of civilization, and at every
level it restricts the mental development of the people in its own
interest. There is a well-known analysis of the religious
"preferences" of the 40,000 Americans, presumably of distinction,
in Who's Who in America. We recognize the limitations of the work.
Whether or no it is true that any clergyman or any nun who has
written a book or two can get into that Valhalla of the living by
pledging himself to buy a copy of the book every year, as is the
case with some books of reference, it is obvious that the business 



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               10

                  ROME PUTS A BLIGHT ON CULTURE

of the work is to supply information about any man or woman who at
the time is in the public eye or ear, whether they be singled out
for skill in literature, sport, the cinema, church-organization,
banking, or striptease.

     With this qualification we see a pregnant significance in the
analysis of the names which Professors Huntington and Whitney
published in their Builders of America a few years ago. They found
that Catholics are represented in Who's Who by only 7.4 per 100,000
of their body (7 men and 0.4 women), and these are very largely --
but the professors do not point out this -- ecclesiastics. You will
gather what this means when I add that even the Mormons, with 11
men and 5 women to the 100,000, outshine them; while the Methodists
have 18 men and 0.6 women. The Episcopalians have 156 men and 18
women: the Unitarians (who are largely freethinkers in America)
have 1,185 men and 103 women per 100,000. In other words, the
farther a Church is removed from the Roman -- belonging to the
Episcopalian is, of course, a matter of respectability -- the
higher its cultural distinction.

     What do the Catholics say to that? They say that it merely
shows the snobbishness of non-Catholics and the manly modesty of
Catholics! I should like these Catholic writers who have this fine
American contempt for snobbery to study the British Catholic. Who's
Who. It is, at least, published in London, but Al Smith and other
"great Americans" figure in it. In discussing this cultural poverty
of the Roman Church in America, to which he quotes several Catholic
witnesses, J.F. Moore (Will America Become Catholic?) speaks of
Romanism in Britain as more distinguished. There are, he says, no
Catholic writers in America to compare with Chesterton, Noyes,
Shane Leslie, Benson, (Father) Martindale, (Father) Knox, and
Sheila Kaye-Smith. If you have read these you will reflect that the
American Catholic body must be very poor indeed, in illumination if
it is outshone by that galaxy: especially as Chesterton's
brilliance -- if you care to use the word -- was increasingly
dimmed and his influence increasingly more mischievous after he
joined the Church of Rome and became a sort of pensioner of it. The
"brilliance" of Father Martindale and Father R. Knox must be a
little joke of Mr. Moore's, as he is usually judicious. However,
against these British giants of the pen American Catholics can, he
says, put only Joyce Kilmer -- what a pity he died nearly a quarter
of a century ago -- though he elsewhere adds Carlton Hayes, Michael
Williams, G.W. Schuster, Kathleen Norris, and Agnes Repplier. You
will have heard of some of them. He adds that American Catholicism
is still poorer in science. A score of American physicists have an
international reputation, and none of them are Catholics, while on
the biological side the Church is still poorer.

     We will return presently to the question of distinction in
science. It is much easier for an artist to be a Catholic. He has
none of these intellectual prejudices about truth and reality and
is as ready to embrace any creed that is prettily dressed as
anything that is pretty undressed. So we do not wonder at the
number of artists. To the literary artists (British Catholics)
given above add Belloc, Sir P. Gibbs, Compton Mackenzie, W.
Meynell, Christopher Dawson, and a few other good second-raters.
Then there are devout artists like Sir Seymour and Lady Hicks, 
Charles Laughton, Sir F. Brangwyn, Sir John Lavery, and Sir G.G.
Scott.
                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               11

                  ROME PUTS A BLIGHT ON CULTURE

     But the chief reason why I recommend you to see this Catholic
Who's Who is because you will find it the most amusing Book of
Snobs on the market. I should explain that, although it is
published in England it has no patriotic limitations. Chiefly, I
imagine, because the compilers felt that there are a few scurvy
folk who would count how many real intellectuals there are amongst
the thousand names and all that they could find in Great Britain
were three or four teachers of chemistry or mathematics at minor
universities, they searched the whole Empire on which the sun never
sets and the whole English-speaking world, ransacked Eire and Malta
(which are as full of titles as fleas), and dipped into France,
Belgium, Italy, and a few other countries. So they got together a
body of Catholic scientists, with your American Dr. J.J. Walsh as
the supreme representative, who would almost fill a Junker plane.
I forgot how many laborious days it took me to collect from the
book just as many Catholic teachers of science in the area covered
(total population about 250,000,000) as I can count on the fingers
of two hand's.

     But that is incidental. The chief purpose of the book is to
give the cream -- and it is very rich cream -- of Catholicism in
Britain, Eire, Malta, etc.: the aristocratic and semi-aristocratic
families down to junior lieutenants of the army and navy provided
they belong to families which never sank to the level of earning
their own living. These and the clergy nearly fill the book.
Titles, diamonds, and gold glitter on every page. The book seems to
cry at you: Look whom you may hope to meet if you join the Catholic
Church. Next in importance are the diplomats -- the gentlemen who
kept the blinds down at Paris, Brusseig, Vienna, Rome, Madrid, and
Lisbon while the bandits armed and the traitors said their prayers
-- the naval and military commanders, and the high civil servants
and legal officials, who are all of great service to the Church.
After that you will surely not be disgruntled because the men of
intellectual distinction, if you grant that description to ordinary
university professors, are less than a dozen out of the, thousands
of professors in the area covered.

     Some Catholics meet this by saying that it is a vulgar
business counting heads (unless they bear coronets), or that they
prefer to think about the really great men of science of earlier
times; especially, it seems, of the time when in the eyes of the
Church the only good scientist was a dead scientist. We will return
to that in a later book. These pleas are, in any case, frivolous.
The compilers of the book ranged from California to New Zealand in
search of scientists or other men of intellectual as opposed to
artistic or social distinction and they did not find enough to make
a football-team. There is another, a very impartial and objective,
way of proving this.

     I suppose the Nazis have included in their monumental thefts
the seizure of the fund which Alfred Nobel left in Sweden to
provide five rich prizes every year for the world's most
distinguished workers in physics, chemistry, medicine, literature,
and the cause of peace. However, the prizes have been awarded for
nearly 40 years and apart from a little patriotic bias in favor of
Scandinavian and the little nations, the awards, based upon the
reports of competent committees in every country, are the safest 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               12

                  ROME PUTS A BLIGHT ON CULTURE

possible indication of distinction. The Nobel Prize is the greatest
and most coveted in the world, and the award is the most impartial,
yet I doubt if five out of the whole 200 winners are or were
Catholics. It is significant that the Catholic Encyclopedia never
mentions the prize. Naturally the scientific recipients, the great
majority, have never written on religion, but after a careful
analysis I can find only Alexis Carrel who is recognizably a
Catholic.

     It is different with the 37 recipients of the literary prize.
Here we should understand that the judges stipulate for "an
idealist tendency" in the works and are themselves religious, so
large numbers of the greater writers of modern tames (Wells,
Conrad, Zola, D'Annunzio, Sudermann, Capek, Galdo's, Ibanez, Gorki,
Tolstoy, Santayana, etc.) have been excluded because they were
freethinkers, while a few sentimental writers belonging to small
countries and hardly known outside these countries have been
included. Yet only 4 or 5 out of the 37 could be claimed as
Catholics of a sort, and the one writer amongst them who definitely
claims to be a convert to the faith, Mrs. Sigfrid Undset, has had
her novels chastised in the American Catholic press for their
"vileness."

     The awarding of the Peace Prize is not so significant because
it is sometimes given to politicians or societies and does not in
any case imply any distinction in the subject except a zeal for
peace. Nevertheless, although the award of it was loose and in some
cases frankly ridiculous, I cannot trace more than one dubious
Catholic in the whole 38 recipients. In short, this supreme and
impartial tribunal, basing its judgment upon annual reports from
important committees in every country, for detecting the highest
distinction in science and letters has in 40 years been able to
give its award to only about half a dozen nominal (and mostly
dubious) Catholics, or to only 3 who definitely claimed to be
orthodox Catholics. In Who's Who Catholics are represented by 7.04
per 100,000 of their number: in this select gallery of men of real
cultural distinction they are represented by 1 in 100,000,000.

     American Catholics despise and jibe at freethinkers as a rare
and negligible species. Well, of the 37 winners of the literary
prize, the only section in which you can look for public
expressions of opinion about religion, no less than 27 were avowed
freethinkers (and more than half of them Atheists). In the peace
section 13 out of the 29 selected individuals were avowed
freethinkers, and most of the others are not declared. One only was
in some sense a Catholic. In the scientific section few have given
a clue to their creed, as is the way of scientific men today, but
the great majority of those who have expressed themselves on
religion were freethinkers -- even Mme. Curie and her daughter
openly declared their secession from the Church -- and only one is
clearly a Catholic.

     To put it differently, Catholics claim that they are a fifth
of the race, and if we grant them five Nobel Prize winners (though
Some are doubtful) they are one-fortieth of the world's leading men
and women of intellectual distinction. But this is still too
flattering to Catholics, They profess to number more than 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               13

                  ROME PUTS A BLIGHT ON CULTURE

300,000,000 of the white race, from which the culturally
distinguished are almost entirely selected. In this sense they
profess to be one-third of the race yet are only one-fortieth of
its more distinguished stratum. And this agrees with what we found
from other sources and is fully confirmed by apologetic lists of
"great Catholic scientists." The names, when they are not
fraudulent, almost all belong to the past. Let them attempt to draw
up a list for this century. Professors of, and original workers in,
science are now ten times as numerous as ever but the Catholic
proportion of them shrinks into invisibility.

     Hilaire Belloc said to me (with his characteristic thump of
the table) some years ago: "I don't care what you say, McCabe, the
intellect of Europe has been warped ever since the 16th Century."
It is one of his favorite themes that his Church alone develops the
intellect on sound lines or teaches folk to think clearly. In one
form or other it is a common plea of Catholic apologists. Well,
there is the answer in facts. The Church of Rome puts a blight on
culture and intellect. There is no other possible explanation of
the facts. Of adolescent and adult Catholics (about 100,000,000 in
the world) about one-half are illiterate, as I will show in the
next chapter, and half the remaining have only that paltry degree
of literacy which makes their creed or opinions of no particular
interest. The cultural value of the remainder you can judge by the
number of distinguished men who emerge from the body. When you are
considering a body of ten's of millions of men and women of a score
of races and different environments, the number of them that rise
to the top is a sure indication of the cultural quality of the
body.

     All of which points infallibly to the conclusion that the
Church itself is responsible. One of those fine-natured writers who
are always trying to say a good word for Catholicism, which they
never study, asks all sweetly reasonable folk to see that mental
concern about religion must help to develop the mind and promote
thinking. We might admit this on one condition: that the man or
woman does really think about religion by reading both sides and
conscientiously weighing their arguments. That is just what the
Roman Church uses its heaviest weapons to prevent. The Catholic
book is a holy book: the critical book is a "bad" book and is on
the same level as the kind of book you cannot buy openly. If we are
agreed that democracy is the ideal political form, we agree also
that to teach all people to think critically and inquire without
restriction is the only way to get it to work satisfactorily. The
law of the Roman Church is just the opposite. You must not inquire
outside your own creed and you must not think critically even
within its range.

     The second source of blight is that Catholic doctrine is so
really absurd that it repels the properly developed intellect. You
read of 40,000 converts a year -- about one to every priest in the
United State's -- but you rarely hear much about their mental
quality. They are mostly either people with money and not much
brain, or artistic people who do not take creeds literally, or men
and women who pass over for social reasons (marriage, etc.). And
while you hear a lot about the 40,000 a year who go in you hear 



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               14

                  ROME PUTS A BLIGHT ON CULTURE

nothing about the 100,000 a year who drop out, though even the
figures given in the official decennial census show such a lapse. 
All sorts of motives draw people in, but it is always the falseness
or absurdity of the creed that drives them out.

     Catholics with considerable general knowledge and mental
vitality will generally be found to take the creed with great
license. Pope Pius X, the peasant-Pope, in his blundering campaign
against Modernism was at least honest in trying to drive all these
people -- the real "bad Catholics" -- out of the Church, and there
was a notable exodus of cultivated people. Unlike the American
apologist the Pope did not care two pins about cultural quality. He
wanted folk who recited the creed every Sunday to mean what they
said. But every history of that campaign will tell you that while
a few conscientious men like Tyrell walked out the great majority
protected themselves by silence or, if they were in official
positions, foreswore the truth. "The great advantage of the
Catholic Church is the freedom it allows you," said a leading
Catholic writer and scholar to me. When I retorted, "Yes, if you'll
keep your mouth closed," he was silent. Most of the literary men
and artists who adorn the Catholic list never defend Catholic
doctrines (hell, original sin, etc.) in detail. You never know what
they really believe. As one of them said to me, they admire the
Church "as a whole." But the man whose main interest in life is
intellectual, the man who dislikes feudal systems for the mind,
despises this attitude. Hence that appalling poverty of the Church
in the higher culture which infallibly betrays that it puts a
blight on thinking. And this is the Church that demands privileges
in America because it contributes so materially to the higher life
of American civilization: the Church that keeps a staff in
Washington (as well as boon companions in the White House) to give
the government the profound advantage of "the Catholic view."

     Below the college-trained -- let us say Catholic-college-
trained, as this is a very different matter -- stratum is the thick
stratum of the illiterate and semi-illiterate. I doubt if many
realize the importance of this in the Catholic Church, and I leave
it for adequate treatment in the next chapter. Here let us make
clear one of the most startling facts about the Church. It is very
poor in cultural distinction but exceptionally well represented in
the criminal class.

     I have recently examined a dozen up-to-date American manual's
of sociology and penology. Crime, naturally, is discussed at great
length in them. Not only have the adventures of the G Men caught
the imagination of the nation but experts have worked out the cost
of the total volume of crime and shown folk that it is an
intolerable species of parasitism on the industrious community. One
result has been that in the last ten years much has been done to
create a real criminological literature in America. The division of
functions between Federal and State governments and corruption in
high places left America with the poorest criminal statistics in
the civilized world, but sociologists are steadily improving the
situation. We get not only gross totals but analyses which show the
incidence of crime as regards sex, age, environment, etc. But I
have not found one single sociologist who discusses, and
illustrates by statistics, the relation of crime to the religion or


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               15

                  ROME PUTS A BLIGHT ON CULTURE

irreligion of the criminal's. It is left to journalists, essayists,
and apologists to stamp it upon the public mind that religion is
the great corrective. But whether it is so in fact they are
incapable of studying, and the scientific experts will not help
them. Because the Churches, and very particularly the Roman Church,
do not want the facts known. The whole of American literature is
not available to me but the more important works are, and when not
only these but such works as the Encyclopedia of Education, the
Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences, and the Encyclopedia of
Religion and Ethics, which ought to give the facts on this
important social-moral issue, are completely silent, I look for the
clerical censor. To adapt a phrase of Huxley's, there is a
barricade to sociological research with the notice: "No Road, by
Order of the Pope."

     A few sets of figures have got out. In 1932 an Irish chaplain
at Sing Sing made an inquiry into the religion of the prisoners and
in the warmth of his indignation he sent the figures to be
published in The Commonweal (Dec. 14). He had found that 855 out of
1,581 prisoners described themselves as Catholics and were accepted
as such by him. This could be checked by a similar inquiry in the
jails of Detroit, Chicago, St. Louis, and Philadelphia. but, of
course, no such inquiry was made. In D.C. Culver's exhaustive two-
volume Bibliography of Crime and Criminal Justice (1934 and 1939),
with about a thousand pages of literature, works on "Crime and
Religion" fill a few lines and list one paltry Catholic book and a
few apologetic articles. It is so much easier to talk rhetorically
about how Catholic training must help to keep down crime and
dismiss these prisoners as "not real Catholics"; though as baptized
persons they help to swell Catholic statistics.

     But experience in other countries shows that the Sing Sing
statistics are normal and reliable. In Great Britain the religion
of prisoners is no longer published. The clergy do not approve of
the practice. But I find in a government publication of 10 years
ago when the religious analysis was still published, that in the
jails of Great Britain on March 28, 1906, there were 5,378 Roman
Catholic prisoners in a total of about 25,000, and it is stated
that this means that the Roman Catholics were represented in the
criminal population by 247 per 100,000 of their body. Even the
Church of England, to which large numbers of convicts profess to
belong (since officials insist on some creed) whether they do or
not, had only 118 per 100,000. The Methodists had 10, the Baptists
9, per 100,000.

     In 1913 I discussed the subject in his office with my friend
Sir Robert Stout, Chief Justice of New Zealand, and he got his
staff to work out for me the figures for that Dominion. It
transpired that while Catholics were only 14.07 percent of the
total population they were 41.74 percent of the prison population.
In the same year a leading government official at Melbourne gave me
the figures for Victoria, and they told just the same story. But
Australia continues to publish this religious analysis, and anybody
may see the figures. The Victorian government reported in 1936 that
Catholics were 18 percent of the population of the province but
29.61 percent of the criminal population. The government of New 



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               16

                  ROME PUTS A BLIGHT ON CULTURE

South Wales reported (Statistical Register, p. 216) that 505
prisoners out of 1,330 in its jails were Catholics, though
Catholics are less than one-fifth of the total population of the
province.

     And if any man still hesitates to see that these figures mean
that the Irish, with Roman Catholic training, are more apt to
become criminals than the English, Welsh, and Scottish -- the
English figures given above include a strong Irish element in
London, Liverpool, Newcastle, etc. -- let him study the statistics
of crime in Catholic countries. It is impossible to get complete
figures, as Catholic countries, being less efficient in such
matters than Protestant countries, rarely gave reliable statistics
until, recently (if at all), but the data in Mulhall's Dictionary
of Statistics for the last century and Webb's continuation of the
same work for the first decade of this century fully confirm the
truth as far as they go. Whatever allowance you make for different
standards of classification and degrees of police efficiency, the
more criminal status of Catholic countries and the far greater
success in reducing crime of non-Catholic countries leap to the
eye, as the French say.

     One requires great caution in handling criminal statistics,
particularly in the relation of crime to religion. Countries like
Spain and Portugal, for instance, and especially the Latin-American
Republic's had far more crime than the figures published by the
inefficient police. I will return to the subject in the last book,
but certain undisputed facts may be given here.

     Great Britain, in which the Catholics (mostly Irish) are less
than one-twentieth of the population and have no influence whatever
on the formation of the national character (except to swell the
criminal statistics) has the finest-record in the modern world in
reducing every class of crime and delinquency. The few figures
given in the Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences (which has not
dared to touch the question of crime and religion) are confused,
but Mulhall gives authoritative tables. From these we learn that
since 1840 grave crime has been reduced to one-third of what it
used to be though the population has nearly trebled. Other social
offenses have been reduced in the same proportion. France has the
next best record in Europe, especially since 1880, when education
was taken out of the hands of the clergy, the Church was shut out
of public life, and Catholics fell to one-sixth or one-seventh of
the population.. Germany, where until the last few years Catholics
claimed to be a third, and were at all events more than a fourth,
of the population, has a less flattering record; but it is better
in Protestant Prussia than in the Catholic provinces. Italy had one
of the worst crime records in Europe until the Papacy was deprived
of secular rule in 1870, and it fell back -- as any, person can see
by the official Italian figures in the Statesman's Year Book --
into a terrible increase of crime when Mussolini handed back the
schools to the clergy.

     But we have to consider crime and vice in Catholic countries
in the last book of this series -- we shall find that the reproach
extends to drunkenness, bastardy, etc. -- and I will there give the
available figures. I have established the second point of the 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               17

                  ROME PUTS A BLIGHT ON CULTURE

present book. The government of the United States is confronted
with a claim that it must pay special heed to a Pope who has
300,000,000 subjects and a national Catholic Church which is not
only the largest religious body but the finest educational and
moral agency in America. Well, the Pope has not 300,000,000
subjects unless you care to count the millions who rot in the jails
or cower under the spiritual police in Italy, Spain, Portugal,
France, and South America. The Roman Church in America compiles its
total of 20,000,000 by the same dishonest method and is neither an
educational nor a moral force. Its priesthood so confines the
intelligence that few men and women of real intellectual power
associate with it, and its religious-moral education is of such a
nature that it actually supplies more to the criminal class than
any other Church does. It is the poorest in the kind of higher
culture which is a real factor in the advance of a civilization and
the richest in criminal or potentially criminal elements.


                           Chapter III

                 ROME LOVES THE POOR ILLITERATE

     Just as I write my mail brings me a letter in which an
estimable lady, one who is eager to have the truth about the Roman
Church known, gently chides me for the "brutality" of the way in
which I put that truth before the public. She sends me authentic
information about life today in a Catholic country, a country whose
ruler is always treated with great respect in the British and
American press, which, when I hand it on -- probably in the next
book -- will make your hair stand on end. But I am urged to put it
more courteously. "Brutality" is, of course, a friendly
exaggeration, and I gather that the idea is that it would be more
effective to "let the facts speak for themselves."

     I occasionally get such letter's. A few weeks ago a university
professor argued with me in the same vein. I "defeat my own end"
and so forth. And to all of it I reply that 45 years of experience
in such work, not bad temper, dictate the tone of my writings on
the Roman Church. Forty years ago I wrote a little work on the
Church of Rome which so astonished Hilaire Belloc, to whom a friend
lent it, that he thought, that in view of its extreme moderation,
it must be a forgery. It was a more dismal failure than any other
book I have ever written, whereas books in which my pen was allowed
to take its natural caustic course have had numbers of Catholic
readers and hundreds of thousands of others. Most people don't want
appeasement. When facts are brutal and doctrines are stupid say so.
Although this information which just reaches me is startlingly
picturesque and largely relevant to issues of the day no newspaper
in London would admit it, and no publisher would accept a book on
it. That goes also for America. They must not "offend Catholics."
And you will not alter that by simply telling facts. You need to
kindle indignation and resentment in your readers and persuade them
to pass on the facts to others. Courteous talk about Catholic
matters is so often merely a sign of prudence and calculation in
the writers that the kind of man or woman I want to read me resents
or suspects it.



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               18

                  ROME PUTS A BLIGHT ON CULTURE

     If I so; often blame the press I shall not be misunderstood.
No one expects a paper to defy a Catholic threat to injure its
circulation or cut off its Catholic advertiser's. I have worked on
several papers, as an outside member of the staff, and we
understand each other. I attack the system which imposes this
humiliating subservience on them, and more than one journalist or
publisher has wished me more power to my elbow.

     And one of the most important moves in the attack on the
system is to expose the fraud of the Black International in
representing that the Church is far larger and more useful than it
is. Fraud? There you have at once the illustration of what I have
been saying about "strong" and "tactful" language. The Catholic
representation is fraudulent, and you do not tell half the truth
unless you say so. Every Catholic writer knows as well as I do that
his figure of 300,000,000 includes the 100,000,000 who, as I
showed, have left the Church, and he knows that the general public
does not suspect this, He knows as well as I do the cultural
poverty of the Church and its richness in crime, and he tries to
confuse the public mind about these facts by rhetoric and
sophistry. He knows, while he represents the Church as the mother
of education, the patroness of learning, the inspiration of clear
and honest thinking, that, as I will now show, it prefers people
who do not think at all, and the majority of its actual 180,000,000
subjects are either children or illiterate.

     Practically all statistics that would give us sound material
for settling such a question as the social value of religion are
either fantastic or gravely defective. Our sociologists continue to
include religion amongst the factors of civilization, and our
politicians, journalists, and essayists are quite sure of it. But
in an age in which most other statistics are precise to a doctrinal
point the statistics which bear upon this question are grossly
neglected. We saw this in regard to the number of Catholic's and
the relation of Catholicism to crime. It is the same in regard to
Catholicism and illiteracy; and, I Might add, in regard to
Catholicism and drink, illegitimacy, and other relevant matters.

     Statistics of illiteracy are in any case poor. Most countries
do not require a declaration in the census. They may report the
number of recruits when they are called up for military service or
the partners to a marriage who cannot sign their names, but the
backward countries are more apt today, when a high percentage of
illiteracy is a reproach, to give a false or arbitrary figure. Some
countries again include infants among the illiterate, some only
citizens over the age of 5, 10, or 15. With an allowance for their
difficulties I reproduce the table from the Columbia University
Encyclopedia of Education (article "Illiteracy") which is the most
reliable authority and the most recent, fairly full list I can
find. It has the advantage also that in nearly every case the
percentage of the population means over the age of ten. The list is
in alphabetical order, but the point we are considering will be
clearer if I rearrange the items in the order of educational
efficiency.





                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               19

                  ROME PUTS A BLIGHT ON CULTURE

     One other caution is necessary. There are no annual reports on
this point. The leading civilizations boast of their very low 
percentage of illiterates, but backward nations are coy, and you
get little help from the usual year-books such as the Statesman's
Year Book and World Almanac. This list therefore relates to the
situation in the first decade of the present century. That has its
advantages, and I will point out presently the immense alterations
which have to be made today in some cases (Russia, Mexico, Spain,
etc.). But first let me give this impartially compiled list:

                    Illiterates                   Illiterates
                    percent of                    percent of
Country          population   Country        population
Germany (over 20)        0.03      Serbia (over 20)         36
Denmark                  0.2       Hungary                  40
Sweden (over 20)         0.3       Italy                    48
Switzerland (over 20)    0.5       Argentina                54
Holland (over 20)        1.4       Greece                   57
Finland                  1-5       Spain                    58
Scotland (over 20)       1.6       Poland                   59
England and Wales        1.7       Rumania                  61
United States (negroes             Bulgaria                 65
     and immigrants)     7.7       Russia                   70
France                   14        Portugal                 73
Ireland                  17        
Belgium                  18        Bolivia                  82
Austria                  26        Brazil (total population)85

     It need not be said that the countries -- nearly all non-
Catholic -- in which the percentage is only of the adult population
have slightly better records than they appear to have, and that the
quickening of educational work since 1900 by the pressure of world-
opinion and the rise to power of Liberal governments has greatly
lowered the worse figures. From the scattered data in the
Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences for 1920 - 1925, moreover, I
find that still all countries with less than 1 percent illiteracy
(Denmark, Sweden, England, Holland, Scotland, and Switzerland) are
non-Catholic, all countries with 5 to 25 percent are non-Catholic
with a very high proportion of Catholics and were formerly under
Catholic rule, and all countries with 30 percent or over illiterate
are solidly Catholic. It further appears that Poland had still 32.8
percent, Chile 40.8 percent, Mexico 62.2 percent, and Brazil 71.2
(and probably higher) percent in 1920-1925.

     In discussing social questions, such as the genuine social
value of an institution, an ounce of fact is worth a ton of
rhetoric. In the foregoing table, the items of which are not
selected by men, but by the highest educational authority in the
United Sates, you have the facts, and they make a mockery of the
claim that the Roman Church is the mother or inspiration of
education. They show that it is, on the contrary, the enemy of
education. It professes a zeal for it only when a large non-
Catholic majority watches it critically. In the Columbia table all
countries with less than 2 percent had small Catholic minorities of
no public influence in 1900. Germany is an exception but,
notoriously, it was Protestant Prussia that forced the educational
development. On the other hand all countries with over 30 percent 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               20

                  ROME PUTS A BLIGHT ON CULTURE

illiterates had in 1900 Catholic (Roman or Greek) governments and
majorities; and the higher the figure of illiterates the higher the
Catholic majority. The intermediate countries had smaller Catholic
majorities or (as in France) had recently secularized education.

     If I were able to give the full figures for all countries of
Europe and America they would be in harmony with the above. Norway
has little illiteracy: the Latin-American Republics generally have
a high percentage. So the plain teaching of facts is that where the
clergy have, or until recently had, great influence on the
government through a Catholic majority, education is bad.

     And the deeper we go into the situation the worse we find it.
Thirty years ago I had occasion to study the situation in Spain,
where an occasional rise to power of the Liberals had at least done
more for education than was done in more priest-ridden Portugal. I
found that the real proportion of illiterates was said by eminent
educationists to be 68 percent (78 in Portugal), not 58 as reported
by Columbia, but what was called "literacy" was often so ridiculous
an accomplishment that the figure of percentage meant little.
Teachers received -- when they were paid -- $100 per year, but the
state would not pay it, and the parents generally refused. A law
was passed that there should be no, bull-fights where people would
not pay for a teacher, so in some places they gaily drove the
master to the ring and baited him instead of a bull. The schools
were barns, and the teachers had to do other work to get a living
of $3 a week. All the summer the children were wanted for
agricultural work. In short, until the Socialist-Liberal government
of 1932-36, which the Church ruined, began real education, half the
supposed literate one-third of the nation might be dismissed as
illiterate. That is true of Portugal and, apart from Mexico and
Argentina, of Spanish and Portuguese America today. In Spain itself
Franco and the hierarchy have demolished the splendid school-system
which the wicked Reds (with the cordial cooperation of most of the
university professors) had set up.

     But all the figures I have given relate to the present
century, and by 1900 the Church had been compelled by the advance
of civilization to dissemble its hostility to the education of the
workers. What it did or did not do for education when it had
supreme power in the Middle Ages we will briefly consider in the
next chapter. All that concerns us in this book is the quality of
the 180,000,000 actual subjects of the Pope. It is, however,
necessary to be quite clear that the reduction of illiteracy in
Catholic countries points to no zeal on the part of the Church but
to the pressure of critics. Study the language used by the Vichy
group of pious traitors today. Petain is honest, if senile, and
must embarrass the Darlans and Lavals, if not the Vatican. He sees
a monstrous evil in the industrial development, the growth of a
large educated urban population that very soon sees through the
imposture of the priests. The world must return to the placid,
bovine, agricultural life, so that it can be more easily ruled by
the priests and squires.

     We must make short work of this point, and fortunately it is
easy to do so. Glance at Europe in 1800, or at the date of the
French Revolution, I have shown elsewhere that except in three 
countries 95 percent at least of the workers were illiterate and 

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               21

                  ROME PUTS A BLIGHT ON CULTURE

incredibly ignorant. The three countries of which I make an
exception were Protestant Prussia, Holland, and Switzerland, Great
Britain was the next to become civilized in this respect, but its
clergy had been little better than the Roman priests, and in 1800
certainly more than 90 percent of the worker's were illiterate. In
France, too, the anti-clerical, the Revolutionaries and Napoleon,
had made a beginning of education, though this was lost in the
Catholic reaction after Waterloo.

     Catholic countries did not for many decades, and only then
under anti-clerical pressure, show any, sympathy with this zeal for
educating the workers. The leaders in the reform -- Frederick the
Great, Tallyrand, Pestalozzi, Froebel, Roberi Owen, Bentham, etc.
-- were all skeptics. Once the Holy Alliance and the true Reds or
Anti-Bolsheviks of those days, had extinguished idealism for the
Papacy in Southern Europe all this itching to educate the workers
was destroyed and the priests settled down everywhere to a renewed
lease, as they thought, of their medieval power and exploitation of
the people. It will be enough to consider the case of Italy, one-
third of which was ruled by the Popes and administered almost
exclusively by priests, while the southern section in addition was
in the closest touch with and subservient to the Vatican.

     The southern part of Italy, the kingdom of Naples, is as
conspicuous a monument of the real Roman spirit as the Statue of
Liberty is of American ideals. Before the French Revolution
Voltairean statesmen and a liberal-minded monarch had made it one
of the most progressive areas in Europe. The troops of the
Revolution overran all Italy and strengthened the anti-clerical
humanitarianism of Naples. But when they were forced to withdraw,
the royalty and clergy, acting in the closest collaboration, had a
fearful revenge. Neapolitan historians of the time, the chief of
whom was a Catholic and royalist, insist that in the course of the
next 40 years the reactionaries slew 250,000 men, women, and
children of the reform party, and tens of thousands were in each
decade packed in the horrible jails. All educational and social
work was, of course, extinguished. The party which had advocated
such work and had had even in so small a kingdom at least half a
million followers also was extinguished, and the region became one
of the most backward in Europe. And our elegant essayists instead
of looking up this bloody story of the extinction of sound stocks,
which our manuals of history will not tell today from fear of
offending Catholics, talk in their charming way about the
Neapolitan and Sicilian character with its "dolce far niente," its
amiable laziness and impenetrability to modern ideas as if it were
as normal a feature of the sunny land as the olives and roses. It
is, on the contrary, the work of priests.

     The kingdom of the Popes in Central Italy was just as bad. It
was, according to all authorities, one of the foulest areas in
Europe from the moral-social angle. It will be enough to quote the
official figures for 1901, when the national government had been
conducting for 30 years such educational work as the poor resources
permitted. Still 44 percent of Italians over the age of 20 were
illiterate, but it is the distribution of the illiteracy that is
most significant. In the north (Piedmont), where the Austrians had
not entirely neglected education when they ruled it and the 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               22

                  ROME PUTS A BLIGHT ON CULTURE

Sardinian government which succeeded them had done more, the
illiterate's were 28.3 percent; and the statesmen who had thus
reduced illiteracy were under the Pope's ban of excommunication. In
the central and formerly Papal provinces (including Rome) the
illiterates were 51.5 percent, and in the southern provinces they
were 69.7 percent. In Piedmont, the old center of the damned
Italians and very anti-clerical, the illiterates were 17.69
percent: in Calabria, which was solidly Catholic, they were 78.70
percent.

     Well, there's the real Rome for you. That is what the Catholic
Church does for education, when it runs a state or has, as in
Naples, absolute power over the kingdom. You will find these
figures in any of the older works of reference -- the Columbia
Encyclopedia, we saw, gives 48 percent for the whole country -- and
the facts about the condition of the Pope's own kingdom are in
every older historian, even in the standard Cambridge Modern
History (Vol XI). Your historians and sociologists of today won't
tell them. It would hurt the feelings of our Catholic fellow-
citizens -- to say nothing of hurting the circulation of the book.
So the Catholic apologists break into raptures about the Church's
zeal for education, about the way in which this misguided modern
world thwarts its noble efforts to teach folk to think clearly,
about the fearlessness with which it confronts all facts and all
truth. . . . It appears that some people expect me to talk politely
about these matters.

     South America is notoriously worse than Italy, Spain, and
Portugal, and the more solidly Catholic the Republic the more
ignorant it is. Perhaps we shall be reminded of their poverty.
Brazil, with a capital which is a paradise of millionaires and its
vast hinterland which is described by expert's as one huge, squalid
hospital, has the most illiteracy. Is it poor? Then find out, why
a country with such stupendous resources can be poor, and You will
come back to the refusal to educate; and Brazil is today the worst
area on the American Continent for the Catholic persecution of
idealists. Add the Philippines and the French, Belgian, and
Portuguese colonies. Notice how the little states which Hitler is
permitting the Vatican to set up in the wilderness his troops make
-- Slovakia, Croatia, etc. -- are patches of deep Catholicism and
dense illiteracy. Read how the moment a state falls back under
priestly domination, after a spell of anti-clerical control its
educational system is destroyed or eviscerated. Ten years or less
ago American and international paedagogists were talking with great
admiration of the fine educational work at Madrid, Prague, and
Vienna. They are now silent. The cultural blight spreads from Spain
and Austria to France, Belgium, the Catholic provinces of Holland,
Czecho-Slovakia, and wherever the Butchers smirkingly lead back
their friends the priests to power. Rome loves the illiterate. They
are so easily persuaded to burn heretics and kiss bogus relics.

     Above all examine carefully this sacred fury of the Vatican
against Reds, Communists, or Bolsheviks. As I have earlier pointed
out, the Vatican dare not say that its anger is kindled by the
political and economic theory of the Marxists; nor can we suppose
it to be particularly interested in their choice of a color. The
bitter hostility to them which was roused by the Popes throughout 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               23

                  ROME PUTS A BLIGHT ON CULTURE

the Catholic world was based upon a tissue of lies about outrages
and one admitted fact -- that wherever Communism spread the Roman
Church lost millions of followers. And the reason why people fell
away from the Church in such crowds was that for the first time
their eyes had been opened -- by formal education in the school
(child and adult) followed up by special enlightenment on religion.

     Is this a coincidence? When, as I told in an earlier booklet,
the Pope opened his campaign, he said that Bolshevism must be
destroyed in Russia, China, Spain, and Mexico; and at that time the
educational world everywhere was discussing with lively interest
the remarkable progress in education that was taking place in
Russia, Spain, Mexico, and the Communist provinces of China! The
Pope would have added Austria but he had already got his agents in
Vienna and their Fascist allies to destroy that great social
enterprise. He could count upon his "chivalrous" Japanese friends
to undo the work in China, and he blessed the savage vandalism of
his allies in Spain, where for three years educational progress had
commanded the respect of all experts. There remained two countries
in which education was making rapid progress, Mexico and Russia,
and the Vatican and the whole Roman Church continued to shriek for
the blood of these.

     It is not a point on which I can linger here, but I say, and
have proved in earlier works (especially in the Appeal to Reason
Library), that the most rapid and devoted work in the world in
educating the workers was found ten years ago in Austria, Spain,
Mexico, and China, and that there is no dispute on that point in
paedagogical literature. We have seen what the Vatican did in Spain
and Austria and tried to get done in Mexico. I say again that the
most wonderful educational work in all history was being done in
Russia, as leading educationists in America admitted, and the Roman
Church was one of the guiltiest agencies in the world in slandering
Russia and calling upon Germany and Japan to annihilate the
government and all its work. On the other hand, the vilest
prostitution of education in modern history was at the same time
proceeding in Japan, Germany, and Italy. And the Pope pressed his
affection upon the Nazis, cooperated in education in Italy, and
gave gold medals and paternal blessings to the Japanese. But I
remember my manners and will just conclude politely that I really
do not think that the Church of Rome is a friend of education.


                           Chapter IV

              THE MYTH OF ITS PATRONAGE OF LEARNING

     We are now in a position to reply to the question which I put
on an earlier page of this book: Who are these Roman Catholics?
They claim a privileged position in America on the ground that they
are the largest religious body in the country and their Church is
the largest and most important in the world. On the first point we
reflect that the fact that Catholics form one-eighth -- it is
probably nearer one-tenth -- of the population of the United States
seems an amazing reason for seeking, as they do, to interfere with
the lives and literature of the non-Catholic seven-eighths and for
thinking that they ought to be consulted by the head of the state. 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               24

                  ROME PUTS A BLIGHT ON CULTURE

That they do so interfere we have seen in every chapter. They
dictated policy on the Civil War in Spain and attempted to dictate
it in regard to: Mexico and the European War. They fly at medical
and civic authorities who would relieve non-Catholic mothers of
excessive child-bearing, take the lead in fomenting racial
bitterness against the Jews, dominate the school-system (even non-
Catholic) in some cities, arrogate a most insolent control of
public instruction by newspapers, books, and libraries, impose
their narrow-minded views on all theaters and cinemas, and so on.
It is really extraordinary how the American who boasts of his
freedom and independence submits to this sort of feudal insolence.

     Back of it all, apparently, is respect for the larger claim,
that the Church of Rome really is unique in its colossal
membership, its world-wide organization, and its massive service.
In this book I am exposing the fallacy of this idea. On the face of
it there is a monstrous deception of the public because priests
know, and are aware that the public does not know, that the total
of 300,000,000 Catholics contains at least 100,000,000 who have
left the Church. The simplest analysis of the figures at once shows
that, as we saw. It is reasonable to put the genuine total at
something like 180,000,000.

     Of these 180,000,000 a little over one-fourth are children
under the age of 10. The official American census gives that as the
proportion. As Catholics generally leave the Church after that age
and many seceded parents let their women-folk or relatives have the
infants baptized -- a good booze hallows every cause, to paraphrase
Nietzsche -- the proportion of children under ten is probably
higher in the Roman Church, with its high fertility-rate in
backward countries. However, we will, as usual, be moderate and say
that about 50,000,000 of the 180,000,000 are children under 10
whose allegiance to the Pope is not very clearly a thing to boast
about.

     This applies also to many millions over the age of 10 and
under 20, but what we learned in the last chapter opens up a
different perspective. The fact is, apparently, that of the
130,000,000 subjects of the Pope over the age of 10 at least
90,000,000 are totally illiterate. Turn back to the table I gave.
Taking one Latin-American Republic with another the gross
illiteracy of the whole 80,000,000 people is over 60 percent. The
Encyclopedia Americana gives Columbia 68, Nicaragua 60, and so on.
For the whole, 60 percent is moderate, and it will hardly be
disputed that these illiterates are not the millions of workers
who, joined by many men of a middle-class which has a long
tradition of anti-clericalism, made the Vatican shudder 10 years
ago. You can very safely say that 50,000,000 adult Catholics from
Mexico to Patagonia are as illiterate as babies of a weird and
wonderful ignorance. The state of Portugal and the Portuguese
possession's is as bad, and particularly all the illiterates of
Spain and Italy are good Catholics. Add the millions of the
Philippine Islands, the West Indies, Croatia, Slovakia, Poland,
Eire, and the foreign missions. The grand total of illiterate
subjects of the Pope must approach 100,000,000. Add these to the
50,000,000 under the age of ten.



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               25

                  ROME PUTS A BLIGHT ON CULTURE

     Pray do not think me as snobbish as the Catholics who write
glittering Who's Who. I have had many a friendly talk with these
folk in Mexico and Cuba, in Spain and Italy. But when your Catholic
friend throws his 3,00,000,000 at your head you would like to know
just how significant the number is. Perhaps between 30,000,000 and
40,000,000 of them could sign their names or read a newspaper. I am
sorry if I am wasting your time but I fancy that that is news to
you. Yet it follows inexorably from the facts I have given in this
book. The Pope has certainly not 50,000,000 subjects who could
write their own names. And, not to put too fine a point on it, what
is the value or significance of the beliefs of most of the
"literate" 30,000,000 or (if you prefer) 40,000,000? The majority
in Catholic countries -- and even in Germany -- are peasants; and
you probably know more than I do about the majority of the Irish,
Polish, Italian, etc., Catholic workers of America.

     In short, in how many cases is the faith of even a literate
Catholic intellectually impressive? I described the work of the
school; and very few of those who pass through it have the courage
to defy the prohibition under pain of hell or read in later years
a book that tells them the truth about their creed and Popes. Their
colleges and academies are just as narrow, and the youths and young
women in their Normal Schools naturally learn history only as they
have to teach it. The kind of lecture on science, history, or
philosophy that is delivered in the Catholic University you can
judge at any time by the publications of the professors and by the
articles in the Catholic Encyclopedia. The upshot of it all is
plainly seen in the miserable representation of Catholics in higher
culture which I described. There is a blight on the whole system.

     I sometimes imagine myself getting an American statesman in a
quite corner and putting these things to him. I fancy he would nod
and listen and then say: "You damned fool, they have 10,000,000
votes and those are worth more than a hundred scientists and
philosophers." If I tried an editor he would point out that they
have rich advertisers and a shocking power to shift a body of
readers from any paper they denounced to one that plays up to them.
If I turn to a publisher he reminds me, regretfully, that Catholics
forbid the press to bring my, name or my works to the notice of the
public. And this pernicious system will explain to you the vague
reputation which the Church has -- for learning and the patronage
of learning. Its apologists can say what they like with little fear
of contradiction.

     Their case, when they go into detail, is the usual mixture of
mendacity and sophistry. First, it was the Church of Rome that,
when it emerged from the catacombs, "gave the world schools." And
since there is not a manual of the history of education, not an
encyclopedic article, published in the last 50 or more years that
does not describe how the pagan Roman Empire had a system of
universal and free schools for the people, "mendacity" is the only
word to use here. The few paltry schools which the Church opened in
one or two cities, were, of course, like the Catholic schools
today, to prevent their own children from going to the pagan
schools. And there is no more dispute about the fact that the Roman
school system was entirely destroyed when the Roman Church obtained
power over Europe, and that during the next five centuries you 
could count on your fingers the schools existing at any time.

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               26

                  ROME PUTS A BLIGHT ON CULTURE

     Next is the hoary old untruth that after all the monks of the
Dark Age "preserved the classics for us." lt took Italian scholars
nearly two centuries to dig up such Latin classics as we have, and
some of these and all the Greek classics were not preserved at all
in Europe. The leaders of this enterprise -- Petrarch, Boccaccio,
etc. -- despised the Popes, and the work was nearly complete when
the first Pope to take an interest in it, the not very religious
Engenius IV, mounted the Papal throne.

     Well, says the apologist, these classics were in very large
part, if not for the most part, erotic poetry and comedy -- the
works of Aristotle were got from the Arabs and those of Plato from
the Greeks -- and the revival led to a terrible lot of immorality.
Was that why the good monks preserved them? Never mind that, says,
your apologist, but think of the zeal for schools and learning
which beyond any question swept Europe (except Rome, let me
interject) from the 11th Century onward.

     As my Peter Abelard (1901) is one of the chief studies of the
movement in its first stage and was for years on the reading list
of the historical section of American universities -- I suppose
Catholics got it struck off -- I know rather more than the
apologist about this medieval scholastic movement. But I have
written all about it elsewhere. I will just make three points.
First, it was admittedly inspired by the Arabs of Spain and Sicily,
not by the Church. Secondly, it was at first and for about a
century a splendid if turbulent and frothy free and independent
movement, and most of its more brilliant leaders were condemned by
the Church. Thirdly, when heresy spread to whole provinces in the
wake of the school-movement, the Church destroyed its freedom of
speculation and its incipient teaching of Arab science and turned
the new universities, except a few that remained more or less
independent and trained lawyers and medical men, into schools of
theology for clerics and monks: who reads today the works of the
greatest masters of these schools? Very few priests even.

     There, says the apologist, you betray your senility and out-
of-datedness. There is a remarkable revival of interest in the
school-men, as it has been discovered that the inspirational ideas
of the American Revolution and Constitution came from them. Yes --
discovered by Catholic apologists. I confess that it always puzzled
me why they could not fake a better mare's nest to discover for
this purpose than the works by Cardinal Bellarmine until I learned
that the chief reason was that one of Bellarmine's books was found
in Jefferson's library. My godfathers! When I die, in a few years,
they will find in my little library many works of Catholic or
Protestant piety, some on Hindu metaphysics or Theosophy, the
Little Flower of St. Fraieis, the Bible in three or four languages,
Rabelais, Mark Twain's description of conversation at the Court of
Queen Elizabeth. . . . I will take up the point seriously in the
fifth book. The few ideas that do not seem quite mildewed in Thomas
Aquinas were borrowed from Aristotle and the Arabs. He was educated
within a few miles of Arab-Norman Sicily and all his life he read,
translations of Aristotle and Ibn Roshd (Averroes):





                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               27

                  ROME PUTS A BLIGHT ON CULTURE

     For the rest, if you want to make a substantial test of this
claim of Catholic scholarship without having to wade through a vast
library of trash dip into any impartial histories of literature,
philosophy, and science. To begin with you may care to know that
practically all Catholic works written from the 2nd Century to the
13th Century are contained in the immense Migne Collection. I
should say that the only work in that collection of 1,000 years of
Catholic learning that anybody reads today, in translation, is
Augustine's City of God, and very few read that. Few literary men
would shed a tear if the rest were burned.

     Anyhow, take a good short history of literature; and literary
men, as I said, accept or profess Catholic doctrines more easily
than others. It will tell you of a vast and valuable literature,
only partially preserved, of the Greeks and the Romans. It may then
mention Augustine, but from the 4th Century to the 14th Century it
will give ten pages to Arab and Persian literature for any ten
lines it may give to Catholic works. Then names like Dante,
Petrarch, and Boccaccio -- all very independent of the Popes and
the School-men -- perhaps Jehan le Meung, Margaret of Navarre, and
Villon -- a very naughty trio -- Chaucer (a skeptic), and a few
others will represent what are called the palmy days of Roman
Catholicism. Cervantes (clearly not under Church inspiration), the
monk Rabelais (not "for maids and youths"), Montaigne (a skeptic),
Galileo (hounded by the Pope), and a lot of French writers who were
mostly skeptics like Moliere and Boileau shine in the period of
transition, and the gloom settlers again over Catholic lands until
you come to the Joyce Kilmers and G.K. Chestertons of modern times.
For the last 100 years the great maority of the leading Italian,
French, and Spanish writers have been skeptics, not Catholics.

     Philosophy you need not read up. Until some recent American
began to flatter the Church a history of philosophy consisted to
the extent of 49 percent of an account of Greek, Hindu, and Arab
speculations and 49 percent of an account of the systems of modern
thinkers. Catholic "thinking" occupied about 1 percent of the space
between the two. What would you expect where Catholic philosophy,
of which I was once professor, described itself from the start and
still describes itself as "the handmaid of theology" -- or the
slave of dogma.

     For science take, if you like, the most learned American
history, that of Dr. G. Sarton. It is so little prejudiced against
Catholics that it notices science in the Christian Fathers, which
no one ever discovered before, yet it cannot make out a case for
the Catholic period (400 to 1550). Its best selections are monks
like Roger Bacon and Albert who simply tried to popularize Arab
science until the Church snuffed them out. The work is, like a
history of literature, really divided into three parts: Greek,
Arab-Persian, and Modern Science. As to the pioneers of the modern
development -- Vesalius and Pare, Galileo and Torricelli, Volta and
Galvani, etc. -- no one really knows what most of them thought
about Popery. They lived in an age when men of science adapted the
counsel of St. Paul and said: It is better to go to church than to
be burned.

 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               28

                  ROME PUTS A BLIGHT ON CULTURE

     I have before me one of the longest lists I can find of "great
Catholic scientists." Most of them lived before the middle of the
18th Century, when science, rudimentary as it was, did not clearly
conflict with religion and when a student of science who lived in
a Catholic country was haunted by a smell of sulphur. What
Copernicus (converted by these writers into a "devout priest" when
he was neither a priest nor devout, and in any case he merely
discovered that the Greeks had discovered the centrality of the
sun), thought about religion we know no more than what Galileo
thought. But let Catholics have their names before 1750. You might
as well boast that all the writers of Spain today are orthodox
Catholics. After that date the apologists have to use their usual
trickery. Spain and Italy, and Portugal produced no "great
scientists" until in recent times the Liberals broke the power of
the Inquisition. France had a splendid series from Buffon and
D'Alembert (both skeptics), onward, and 9 out of 10 were skeptics.
But I have gone through the list Pisewherp. It is enough that when
the arc-lamp was invented "Catholic scientists" became as rare as
haunted houses. Today the Catholic who boasts that his Church
commands the allegiance of half the white race claims only J.J.
Walsh, of whom the science-reading public would never have heard if
it were not for his position in the Church, in America, one or two
minor chemists and mathematicians in Britain, none in Russia,
France, Germany. . . . They have to claim, against the testimony of
the most authoritative biographers, men like Pasteur, Fabre,
Mendel, and Marenni.

     But did not the Vatican welcome science by founding a great
astronomical observatory? Yes, in the day's when it was still
understood that "the heavens proclaim the glory of God." At all
events the observatory, of which you do not hear much today,
proclaims the glory of the Vatican. Was not Leo XIII enthusiastic
for historical science, in spite of his ignorance in it, and did he
not throw open the Secret Archives of the Vatican to the world's
scholars? Yes. After -- as the Catholic historian Dr. Pastor tells
us -- removing the more compromising documents. Doesn't the Church
in America spend hundreds of millions on education? Yes, in its own
interest and to give instruction that defies every sound principle
of paedagogy.

     But let the apologists speak. One of their chief propaganda
bodies in America is the Calvert Association. and Dr. N. Murray
Butler of Columbia and other American scholars generously sponsor
it. Its chief publication is The Calvert Handbook of Catholic
Facts. This has a section titled "Great Catholics." You will hardly
believe me when I say that besides a few army officers it lists
only Lafayette (notoriously a Deist, though it calls him "a pervert
Catholic"), Marshal Foch, and Charlie Schwab and eight other rich
business-bandits!

     But it refers the readers to a previous section titled
"Civilization and Catholicism." Ignoring the writers stroll through
the Middle Ages in search of great men (Ferdinand of Spain, etc.)
I find it lists as great Americans who were Catholics only Thomas,
Lloyd, J.J. Montgomery, and Holland. What, you never heard of them?
For the last 200 years of world-science it gives Volta, Galvani,
Ampere (who vacillated all his life between skepticism and 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               29

                  ROME PUTS A BLIGHT ON CULTURE

Catholicism), and Morgagni (doubtful). It is painful to add that it
claims also Jenner (of smallpox fame) and Roentgen: on what amazing
grounds even the bold Catholic Encyclopedia does not seem to have
discovered. And of course it claims Fabre and Pasteur, both
apostates, and the devout Abbot Mendel, who is described as a
skeptic in the only authoritative biography.

     This list covers. 250 years -- the most recent man on it died
nearly 100 years ago -- and ranges over the whole imperial Church
on which the sun never sets. Of the claimed 300,000,000 Catholics
of today it names none. Do people expect me to write about this
sort of thing without irony and contempt? Or do you agree with me
that the only uniqueness about the Church of Rome is that it is the
most amazingly successful imposture in history?











                          ****     ****


    Reproducible Electronic Publishing can defeat censorship.


   The Bank of Wisdom is a collection of the most thoughtful,
scholarly and factual books. These computer books are reprints of
suppressed books and will cover American and world history; the
Biographies and writings of famous persons, and especially of our
nations Founding Fathers. They will include philosophy and
religion. all these subjects, and more, will be made available to
the public in electronic form, easily copied and distributed, so
that America can again become what its Founders intended --

                 The Free Market-Place of Ideas.

   The Bank of Wisdom is always looking for more of these old,
hidden, suppressed and forgotten books that contain needed facts
and information for today. If you have such books please contact
us, we need to give them back to America.


                          ****     ****










                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               30



                        30 page printout

    Reproducible Electronic Publishing can defeat censorship.

          This file, its printout, or copies of either
          are to be copied and given away, but NOT sold.

          Bank of Wisdom, Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                          ****     ****

Edited by E. Haldeman-Julius

THE BLACK INTERNATIONAL                 No. 14

               THE CHURCH THE ENEMY OF THE WORKERS

           ROME IS THE NATURAL ALLY OF ALL EXPLOITERS

                        by Joseph McCabe

                  HALDEMAN-JULIUS PUBLICATIONS
                     GIRARD  -- : --  KANSAS

                          ****     ****

   CHAPTER
     I    A Picture of Life in a Catholic Country ............. 1

    II    Those Beautiful Papal Encyclicals ................... 7

   III    The Action Record of the Black International ....... 14

    IV    The Comedy of Christian Socialism .................. 20

     V    The Churches and Radical Injustice ................. 26

                          ****     ****

                            Chapter I

             A PICTURE OF LIFE IN A CATHOLIC COUNTRY

     A few weeks ago there came to me, by a subterranean route, a
poignant letter from a man who has lived, in intimacy with the
people, for many years in a Catholic country of Europe. The press
always refers to this country as a happy little land of democratic
sympathies and entirely Roman Catholic. Its virtual ruler is
described as a particularly enlightened, upright, and humane
statesman. You have probably seen films of groups of its workers
singing, laughing, and dancing merrily in a sunny world; though if
you had not been misled by press-references you would have detected
signs of extreme poverty and would have seen that the gaiety is
that of illiterate, densely ignorant men and women at, culturally,
the lowest level of civilized life. In spite of disease,
exploitation, and poverty they are "happy," in a sub-human way --
until they begin to question the justice of the joint tyranny of
Church and Dictator. But the bold bad man is quickly removed to a
jail in which the vilest medieval torture is used today -- one
American writer who is not anti-Catholic has described these 
tortures -- or to the purgatory of a penal colony.


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               1

               THE CHURCH THE ENEMY OF THE WORKERS

     The first letter I received told me that the land is entirely
Fascist, which I knew; that all the priests belong to the Fascist
party, which is also called Catholic Action and holds its meetings
in the Churches, and that every boy or youth works in it. The local
newspapers praise the Germans every day as well as the Italians. In
the course of a recent editorial one said: "If God so wills it we
must substitute the cross of the Swastika for the cross of Christ."
The British and American papers which were then assuring us that
"the brave little people" would resist the German pressure which
was being exerted on them did not quote this. A priest, praising
Hitler in a sermon said that he was "appointed by God to punish the
world for its irreligion." But my informant added a concrete little
picture which stimulated my appetite for further news.

     On the outskirts of the city a man -- not a poor working man
but an educated and comfortable man -- had a farm. His most
valuable pig fell ill, and my friend suggested sending for a vet.
Oh, no, what could a vet do against the Evil Eye? Next morning a
solemn procession made its way from the church to the sty. The
priest wore over his cassock and surplice a richly embroidered
shawl that is used in dealing with the devil. Altar-boys, one
swinging a censer, walked on either side of him, and the people,
mumbling on their beads, walked behind. They fell on their knees
round the sty while the priest waved the fumes of incense at the
pig and recited his incantations. The pungent smoke got up the
pig's nose, and it staggered to its feet; and the people cried "A
miracle." The priest received his 100 eggs and 2 hens, but the pig
died next day. Seeing that it was going to die, the owner had sold
it to the local butcher to be turned into food for the people. He
then quietly substituted another pig for it, and this wallowed in
the same poisonous filth as its predecessor; but there was now a
bottle of holy water hanging from the roof of the sty to protect
it.

     I naturally wanted more of this for my readers, and I got it.
Before I quote it let me explain. My informant would be ruined and
punished if he were traced, so I make certain details not as
convenient as they might be for the Catholic detective. He is not
a working man but a well-educated middle-class man of high
character. The place from which he writes is not a rural district
but an old city of 30,000 people, well known to thousands of
Americans and Britons, but they are either Catholics or they prefer
to keep their mouths closed. The country will doubtless be
identified by some of my reader's, but I will say only that it is
not at all considered the most backward in Europe, though the great
majority of the workers are illiterate. It is solidly Catholic. The
writer is absolutely reliable both in regard to first-hand
knowledge and on conscientiousness, and I omit from the long
account only a few passages that are relevant to my purpose:

     "A few year's ago this country made a Pact with the Vatican,
and one notices more and more the growing power of the Church. At
government ceremonies, which are often held out of doors here, the
bishop (who by the way has eight illegitimate children) leads the
procession in full regalia and gives the Fascist salute. A new law
has been passed by which all schools must be of one sex, with the
subtle idea of putting the secular schools out of action. This law 
applies even to infants' schools.

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               2

               THE CHURCH THE ENEMY OF THE WORKERS

     "I know the wife of a chemist whose husband is being
threatened by the priests with boycott as she refuses to attend
mass. A man can have as many mistresses as he likes but it is a
crime for a couple to set up home together unless they are married.
It is forbidden to let them a house. Civil marriage is done away
with, and one can only marry in the church. There is much
emigration to South America, and if a person takes a letter from a
priest Saying that he is a good Catholic he can get a good job. Of
courage, an offering for masses will always secure a good letter
though one never goes to mass. ... A Spanish friend of mine
described the national system in a nutshell. He said it was as if
the head of a family had a large box of gold heavily guarded and
refused to part with a penny of it though all the family were dying
of hunger. A writer described this country as a huge prison kept
down by force. There is a state of misery here that you never could
imagine. I happened to know well a skilled workman who has two
weeks off work and two weeks on, and he earns 85 cents a day when
working. But when he has paid his dues to the Syndicate [the form
of Trade Union imposed on Catholics by the Papal Encyclical and
counts his two weeks idle his pay works out at 35 cents a day, and
on this seven people must live. ... The cruel joke is that there is
a law that no man must get less than 50 cents a day but the
government themselves pay 20 cents. The usual wage of a workman is
25 cents. So, being unable to live on that as he invariably has a
big family he must send his children on the streets to beg. The
streets are thronged with starving whining beggars, with little
children with their stomachs swollen, and dropping blood in the
streets in the last stages of starvation.

     "Property rights are very severe, and a man may 'Shoot on
sight any who enters his property. Lately on the property of the
richest Englishman here two men were found speared to death. One
was a poor old man of 72 who was collecting a few sticks for his
fire, and one a young fellow who had the audacity to use the
property as a short cut. No one took any notice. I just happened to
hear of the incident as I lived near. All relations between the
people are vicious, and there is none of that kindly feeling or
sympathy that one gets among the poor in England. The rich have
their houses barred and bolted and scarcely ever help. Their
surplus money goes to building private chapels or at least
enriching them; as there is one in every rich or middle-class
house, or else the money goes directly to the Church. ... For every
one who finds comfort there are 99 who only find terror and worry.
My life as a R.C. was a horror. I lived in terror of sin, terror of
confession, terror of sex, and the supreme terror was of death and
hell. How often I lay shivering in bed thinking that this night I
would surely die and be weighed in the scales of God, so
graphically described to me by the Catholic teachers. Other nights
I lay listening, listening for the devil's cart, driven by headless
horsemen and horses and conveying the children who did not say
their prayers, and I pictured with what glee the devil would throw
them into hell. As a farmer's cart passed rattling over the cobble
stone's in my imagination I could hear the devil's chains rattling
and thought it would stop at our door and collect me. When day came
I was braver and followed all the funerals to the cemetery to make
the sign of the Cross over the Catholic graves and spit on the
Protestant ones. I waited, trembling, for the serpent to jump out 
of my mouth after making what I thought was a bad communion.

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               3

               THE CHURCH THE ENEMY OF THE WORKERS

     "All hospitals are in the hands of religious [monks and nuns]
with no qualifications whatever and more often than not illiterate.
I had occasion to go to the Red Cross the other day. The doctor was
absent, and not one of the three nuns in charge could write a note
for him. A trained nurse offered her services free to the hospital
but they refused as she was not a nun. A young girl whom I know,
living with a man, was forced to have an operation without an
anaesthetic in punishment for her sin. She has been a nervous wreck
ever since. I saw a sweet little girl of four die the other day.
The priest had advised them not to have a doctor as God had need of
another little angel in heaven. A man was dying with T.B. and a
foreign nurse begged to be allowed to give him a drug but the
priest forbade it, as it would be against the will of God. Man must
suffer.

     "To me child labor is the most terrible crime here. They have
little children from the age of seven onward as servants, and they
sometimes pay them nothing. The parents are glad to get rid of them
for their keep. They usually sleep on the floor in the coal-bin and
are often beaten. Someone once recommended to me a woman to do
washing, and a well-dressed woman, armed with a stick, came along
with a little boy of about ten. She was going to superintend while
he did the washing. One never sees a child playing on the streets,
nor are there any parks or playgrounds for them. The schools are
free, but the parents must provide books, etc. and children without
books are not allowed to enter: an order which excludes. all the
poor. The teachers are unqualified. The soldiers get about half a
cent a day and two meals of meat, but one can get exemption by
paying, so the army is composed of the poor and under-nourished.

     "I expect you read in the papers how our government was
unanimously elected. It was such a farce. A notice appeared in the
papers saying: "Go and vote. Your vote won't count, but go and vote
and show the world you are all with the government." They forgot to
add: "If you don't vote you will lose your job." The government is
putting up a lot of show buildings while there is a terrible dearth
of houses for the people. Rents are high in comparison with wages.
The houses at $8 a month are one or two-roomed and usually without
windows. I have seen a Seven-roomed house without windows. The
houses are close together and no sun enters. It is usual after a
rainy day -- and it often rains here -- to see all the bedding out
on the street drying."

     The rest of the letter is too personal and might give more
away than the writer supposes. I will note only that revolt against
this brutal system flickers up here and there but the spread of the
fire is truculently prevented. There is actually a small
Freethought Society in the town, but it meets in such secrecy that
my informant has never been able to get in touch with it. The eyes,
and ears of the priests are everywhere, and if the economic weapon
does not intimidate the incipient rebel there is always the jail or
the penal settlement. Ironically, some fled there from the triumph
of clerical Fascism elsewhere, and now they writhe in the shadow of
an equal tyranny.





                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               4

               THE CHURCH THE ENEMY OF THE WORKERS

     But the above extracts, referring to many sides of life in a
strictly Catholic city, will suffice for my purpose. I do not 
suppose that in America the apologist explains the defects of his
church, as he does in Britain, as due entirely to its Protestant
environment. You should see Catholic life in a Catholic country, he
is fond of saying. It must be difficult to use that piece of pious
deception in the United States. Folk down south are too near to
Mexico and up north too near to Quebec; while engineers and others
who have lived in Columbia, Bolivia, or Brazil tell funny stories.
Most people, however, know these foreign lands only from films
which conceal more than they show, and this little sketch of life
in a really Catholic city -- it is 90 percent Catholic and 70
percent illiterate -- heavily rebukes the apologist.

     I should like to follow it up with a sketch of life in Russia
before the Beasts of Berlin broke unto it. Sociologists generally
agree that one of the best tests of a civilization is the way it
treats its children; one ought to say, how it treats the children
of workers. Whatever faults some find in Russia or the Soviet Union
it is agreed by all experts on this side of its life that it gives
a better time to the children than any other country in the world.
Before the Revolution or the last war the children had as miserable
a time as in this Catholic country. One of the toughest problems
the Soviet authorities had to solve was the reduction of juvenile
crime, and travelers in Tsarist Russia used to tell of child
prostitutes of 13 soliciting openly near the baths. Now Russia, and
especially Moscow, treat children as honored guests. They neither
beg nor work and they are poles removed from the cruelly-treated
starvelings, dripping blood on the streets, of this Catholic city.
Instead of being excluded from schools because they have no shoes
-- which in Russia happens only in summer in the country -- the
poorest have the same teaching and the same holidays and
entertainments as the children of the best paid.

     But I am concerned here with the workers not with the
children, though the fact that vast numbers of them cannot feed the
large families which the priests compel them to have is a
significant detail. A Catholic writer will tell you only, and
proudly, that there is a minimum wage fixed by law. Here, from one
who has moved intimately among them for years -- I can vouch for
that -- is the truth. They are "the stinkers" as the Tsarist
aristocrats used to call the workers, the "clods" as rich folk
called them in medieval England. They may be killed for gathering
a little fallen wood on or taking a short cut through your estate.
It is a picture of comprehensive injustice and exploitation.

     But how far is this representative of the condition of the
workers in Catholic countries generally? Let us try to ascertain
this on strict sociological lines. In which countries of the world
have the great majority of the workers, by general agreement, the
highest standard of living? I confine the comparison to the great
majority, the regular worker's, because the poorest are at much the
same level of life in all countries. If there is any difference
their condition is exceptionally bad in such Catholic countries as
Poland (before the war), Spain, Portugal, and Brazil. In any case
we reach a sound verdict only if we compare the great mass of the
people in different countries.


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               5

               THE CHURCH THE ENEMY OF THE WORKERS

     It will surely be admitted that the highest standard of living
for the largest majority of the workers is enjoyed in the United
States, Soviet Russia, Great Britain, Denmark, Norway, Sweden,
Switzerland, prewar Germany, and prewar France. I would put them in
that order but there is no need to go into that question. The point
is that these are all countries in which the Church of Rome has no
influence on the status of the workers. The one-eighth Catholic
minority in America and France and the one-twenty-fifth minority in
Britain may help to sour certain aspects of public life by Sunday
Laws, Blue Laws, Marriage Laws, etc., but we should smile if they,
claimed to have any responsibility for the economic basis of the
standard of life of the workers. If this were the place to go more
fully into the question we might make a stronger case. While for
instance, the workers of the United States will be put by most
students -- some, who know the vast range of free services in
Russia might prefer the Soviet workers -- at the head of the list
it is very doubtful if we should find as high a proportion of
Catholic workers -- Poles, Irish, Italians, Mexicans, etc. -- in
the higher as in the lower class of workers.

     But we must take it here on broad lines. The countries in
which the workers are best-off are those in which Catholicism is
not among the factors which determine the standard of living. At
the next level we should, still looking only to economic and social
well-being, put Holland -- many might put this at the higher level
-- Belgium, Hungary, Austria, Italy, Jugo-Slavia, Rumania, and
Bulgaria. The proportion of Catholic influence rises and the
standard of living falls. And at the lowest of three levels few
would hesitate to put Spain, Portugal, Poland, and the Latin-
American Republics generally. I have omitted Czecho-Slovakia only
because of its composite nature, but everybody knows that the
status of the workers was highest in Bohemia, lower in more
Catholic Moravia, and lowest in entirely Catholic Slovakia. Asia we
naturally leave out of comparison.

     We might go further and cheek our conclusion by asking in
which countries and under what condition the status of the workers
has risen most rapidly in recent times and in which it has advanced
little or not at all. Russia takes first place, and the character
of the uplifting factors is well known. The least Catholic part of
Czecho-Slovakia and Denmark probably come next. If we distinguish
periods of betterment and periods of reaction we have to assign a
notable advance to the Spaniards and the Austrians under Socialism
and a notable reaction to the Italian workers during the last
twelve years and to those of Austria, Spain, Portugal, and Latin
America generally since they passed under the Papal-Fascist flag.
If the present Fascist-Catholic rulers (under Germany) of Belgium
and France were to survive and carry out their declared plans the
status of the workers there also would deteriorate.

     In fact, we come in the end to a very interesting and
significant contrast. The democracies -- the United States,
Britain, Czecho-Slovakia, Holland, Switzerland, Denmark, Norway,
and Sweden (all non-Catholic) -- will, when Nazism is destroyed,
resume their character and progress. The Vatican, on the other hand
seeks, whatever the issue of the war is, to retain control of
Belgium, France, Slovakia, Croatia, Italy, Spain, Portugal, and the


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               6

               THE CHURCH THE ENEMY OF THE WORKERS

Spanish-American Republics and combine them in a Catholic League,
and it has prescribed their economic form in the solemn language of
a Papal Encyclical. What will that mean for the workers? Well, the
country of which I have given a description in this chapter
declares that it has, in its loyalty to Rome. adopted precisely
this economic structure urged by the Popes. This fact is so
flagrantly opposed to what Catholic apologists in America say about
the Popes and the workers that we must examine the matter
carefully.

                           Chapter II

                THOSE BEAUTIFUL PAPAL ENCYCLICALS

     A learned professor of religious views scribbled a marginal
note on a page of one of my books in which I had summed up vile
social condition of Europe in the last century, after 1500 year of
Papal power. With the usual air of superiority he wrote: "But the
Churches only took up social work at the end of the 19th Century."
Which was precisely my complaint. For nearly 15 centuries the Roman
clergy had contemplated without any serious interference with it,
a social order in which, apart from it other vices, the great mass
of the people, the workers, were treated with grave injustice and,
during most of the time with contempt and cruelty.

     If an apologist were to plead that the clergy had so much to
do in looking after the immortal souls of men that you could not
expect them to study social conditions you would smile, if you know
the moral history of Europe, but you might grant the plea a certain
amount of logic. But the Catholic apologist does not, and dare not,
put forward that very frail excuse. He says, on the contrary, that
the Church is, and always was, the friend, the very best friend, of
the workers. I hardly need to quote Catholic literature on that. It
is the supreme champion of justice and has always stood with its
flaming sword between the helpless workers and the greedy. In a
moment we shall find the Pope saying that very emphatically.

     As far as the past is concerned we will briefly run over the
record in the next chapter, but two reflection's at once occur to
us. Must not this championship of the cause of the workers have
been extraordinarily ineffective seeing that the workers themselves
had to ware a prodigious fight in the last century against
injustices which had lasted for centuries? And is it not a Singular
thing that the pronouncements of Popes on the subject which
Catholic apologists quote all belong to the last 50 years? With
great audacity they quote, when they call the Church the friend of
freedom and democracy, writers of nearly seven centuries ago like
Thomas Aquinas (who defended slavery), but they do not seem to get
further back than Pope Leo XIII when they seek proof of the
Church's interest in the workers. Everybody who knows anything
about socio-economic history knows that the great fight, the heroic
and bloody fight, the fight in which you hazarded your life or
liberty, for justice to the workers was, broadly, from about 1780
to 1880, yet the first favorable Papal declaration they quote is of
the year 1891.




                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               7

               THE CHURCH THE ENEMY OF THE WORKERS

     Why dig up so much history, Catholics peevishly ask me? The
value of the Church today lies in its teaching today, and Catholic
writers fill books with the bold and sound declarations of the
Popes from 1891 onward. The fight was still on, and the "great
Pope" ranged himself on the side of the workers with such
utterances that he was called the Pope of the Workers, even the
Socialist Pope, the author of the Magria Charta of Labor. I
remember the fuss well, having just then been appointed professor
in a Catholic seminary. Radical papers were lyrical; reactionary
papers were annoyed. But before you rush to a library for a
Catholic book to tell you all about this "Charter of Labor's
Rights" read the biographical notice of Leo XIII in the
Encyclopedia Britannica; and it is so sound that the Catholic
revisers -- to be polite -- of the latest edition of that work have
not ventured to alter it. The writer, Dr. Bryant, tell's how Leo
startled the world with his radicalism in 1891 but adds that he
fell back into sheer reaction before he died. He says:

          In 1902 the Sacred Congregation of Extraordinary
     Ecclesiastical Affairs issued instructions concerning
     Christian democracy in Italy, directing that the popular
     Christian movement which embraced in its program a number of
     social reforms such as factory laws for children, old-age
     pensions, a minimum wage in agricultural industries, an eight
     hour day, the revival of trade gilds, and the encouragement of
     Sunday rest, should divert its attention from all such things
     as savored of novelty and devote its energies to the
     restoration of the Temporal Power.

     Did you ever find your attention called to that miserable
change of the Pope's social creed in any one of the very numerous
books and pamphlets written in America on the grand and inspiring
call for justice of Leo XIII? You certainly did not. Catholic Truth
does not do such things. In science a man who made much of a
passage from an earlier great scientist and did not mention that it
was retracted in his later years would be discredited. In the field
of sacred literature he is just clever.

     However, what was this bold and "magnificent" declaration of
Pope Leo XIII? It is contained in the encyclical (or to-all-the-
world) letter Rerum novarum -- these encyclicals are named from the
first two words of the latin text -- of the year 1891. You will
find it useful to consider the historical background. Some ten
years earlier the Pope had struck a bargain with Bismarck. The
Catholic Church in Germany would enlist all its power in Bismarck's
fight against Socialism and for militarism if he would quit his
campaign against the Church itself. It did not make an atom of
difference to Social Democracy. At the German election of 1887 the
Socialists polled 763,128 votes: at the election of 1890 their vote
rose to 1,427,298. In 1890 the Socialist vote in Austria was
750,000, and it was about half a million in France. In other words,
the policy of sheer opposition to Socialism had dismally failed.
Catholic workers were leaving the Church in millions because it
opposed justice to the workers.





                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               8

               THE CHURCH THE ENEMY OF THE WORKERS

     So Leo, or his advisers -- he knew nothing about economic
matters, or indeed any other matters except Church stuff and the 
Latin classics -- had the brilliant idea of taking the wind out of
the Socialist sails by a solemn statement of the attitude of the
Church to Labor questions which would displease the employers and
presumably win the admiration of the workers. The Encyclical was
translated into most languages, and even the secular press hailed
it as a revolutionary pronouncement. It still shines in American
apologetic literature. The Catholic will tell you that the Church
has formulated the Charter of the Rights of Labor in two great
encyclicals, the Rerum Novarum of Leo XIII and the Quadragesimo
anno of the later (and the present) Pope. When you inquire,
however, you will find that the latter has not been translated into
English -- for reasons which you will understand presently -- but
the message of Leo XIII is (if you conceal his retraction of it)
written in letters of bronze on a block of granite.

     Surely, you think, it must be really good. You shall judge for
yourself. I have just read it carefully through once more and made
a synopsis of it, and, as a cheap translation is still available,
you can check my precis of it.

     It opens with the reflection that something must be done to
improve the condition of the workers. The gilds, which under the
lead of the Church so long protected them, were, the Pope says,
"destroyed in the last century." As every student of such matters
knows that they died a natural death, or were (if there is question
of destruction) destroyed by the workers themselves in the 15th
Century, this is not a promising beginning. It gets worse. Owing to
the spread of irreligion the callous world of the 19th Century put
nothing in the place of these beneficent Catholic gilds, and the
workers were left to be exploited by "a small number of very rich
men," while "crafty agitators" led the workers by the nose in the
wrong direction. Socialism cannot be accepted as a remedy because
it is itself unjust and futile. It denies the right of private
property -- the Pope seems to think that under Socialism you cannot
have your own books, carpets, or etchings -- and in this it is
immoral. It preaches a class-war, which is wicked, wasteful,
whereas if employers and workers were all religious (Catholics)
they would live in a beautiful atmosphere of brotherhood, and the
rich would give generous alms to the poor. That is the Pope's idea
of the Middle Ages.

     About half the encyclical is taken up with moral platitudes
and factual inaccuracies of this sort. The idea that the workers of
Europe were protected by gilds until the French Revolution and that
from then until 1890 nothing was done for them would bring the
wrath of a teacher upon a sophomore. Unions of any kind were
truculently forbidden in all countries, Catholic and Protestant,
from the 16th Century until the 19th, but at least there was in
England, and not in Catholic lands, the crude and costly machinery
of Poor Relief. In England, moreover, the workers won the right of
union before 1830, and under Place and Owen (Atheists both) there
was a great development of Trade Unions. There was also a long
series of Factory Acts for the reduction of hours and the 




                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               9

               THE CHURCH THE ENEMY OF THE WORKERS

protection of the workers, and by 1891 the leading States were
considering or inaugurating schemes of old-age pensions, widows' 
pensions, sick and unemployment insurance, etc. The Kaiser
formulated this program for Germany and at once started work on it
in 1890.

     However, let us come to the "constructive" part of the great
Charter. If the workers realize that it is "no disgrace" to work if
you do not happen to "possess the gifts of fortune," and if the
employers "do not tax the workers beyond his strength" and "give
every one that which is just" this "thorny problem of capital and
labor is well on the way to settlement. It takes a Pope to discover
things like that. For a moment the capitalists get a jolt when the
Pope says that "it is only by the labor of the working man that
States grow rich" but, needless to say, he does not pass on to
Marx's theory of surplus value, of which he had probably never
heard. It is just a clumsy way of saying that capital cannot
dispense with labor. Then, after an excursus on the divine origin
of authority and the duty of the State to check employers who
impose conditions which injure the morals, religion, or health --
as I said, Britain already had a whole code of laws checking such
employers -- of the workers, the Pope gets to concrete proposals.

     The "revolution" is supposed to be here. The Pope mentions the
strike as a weapon of the workers and does not condemn it. He is
content to say that if the State were guided by religion it would
see that the grounds of strikes did not exist. Then we get the
"rights" of the workers. They must have a day's rest on Sunday (and
go to church), they must not be compelled to work such hours that
it "stupefies their minds and wears out their bodies," and the
wages must be "sufficient to support a frugal and well-behaved
working man." All this had been a platitude of Radical (and much
Liberal) as well as Socialist literature for several decades, and
the astonishment of the world that a Pope should indorse the claim
of one day's rest in seven (which had been normal in Protestant
countries for three centuries) and that men should not be
overworked is really a proof of its insincerity in its new
admiration of the Church of Rome. If there was any "revolution" it
was in the fact that the Roman Church had comprehensively and
officially opposed the rights of the workers for more than 100
years, or since they had been clearly formulated on the eve of the
French Revolution, and now that it saw the workers deserting it in
millions it admitted the most elementary of those rights.

     The American Catholic apologists on the social side Completely
ignore these aspects of the Pope's deliverance. They surely know
that what he calls "crafty agitators" had been demanding these
rights for the workers for 100 years yet they represent the Pope as
putting some profound new social wisdom before the world. They lay
no stress on the really revolutionary -- if it were clearly and
sincerely meant -- statement that "it is only by the labor of the
working man that States grow rich." Catholic social writers would
not dare to say that themselves in America today. It is the
essential basis of Bolshevism, the essential meaning of the hammer
and sickle. But I agree with them here that the Pope meant no more
than that the miner produces coal and the agricultural worker corn.



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               10

               THE CHURCH THE ENEMY OF THE WORKERS

Any other meaning is quite inconsistent with the Pope's -- indeed
all Popes -- settled social ethic that the division of the race
into masters (private employers) and wage-earners is in accordance
with the divine will.

     As to the Sunday rest -- which, by the way, Britain, America,
Germany, etc., not only granted but sternly insisted on for
religious reasons -- the profit of the Church itself is here too
clear for us to consider it disinterested. Of the Pope's protest
against overwork also we take no notice. At the time when he wrote
this there had been a mighty and successful struggle for the
reduction of hours and the curtailment of the work of women and
children in Great Britain for 70 years and for a generation in
America, France, and Germany. It was Catholic countries like Italy,
Spain, and Portugal that needed the moralist, and neither then nor
at any, later date until Socialism became a power did they carry
out any serious reform. In fact, the worst condition of labor,
especially child labor, continued to be found in Catholic South
Italy, Spain (except 1932-6), Portugal, and Poland right down to
the outbreak of the war.

     The gem of the encyclical is said by the apologists to be the
demand for "a living wage." It is the minimum demand that any
reformer ever drew up because, obviously, the far greater question
is: What is a living wage? The Pope, in any case, did not use that
very familiar phrase, and how any Catholic employer in the world
could object to what he did say is incomprehensible. In two
passages the Pope goes beyond the hoary old Church-platitude that
in rewarding labor employers must be "just" -- leaving it to them
to say what is just. The first short passage is said in one
"official" translation to be that the wage must provide "the means
of living a tolerable and happy life." The word "happy" is here
arbitrarily inserted. The Latin text has no such word. The other
official translation is that the wage must suffice "to support the
wage-earner in reasonable and frugal comfort," The word
"reasonable" again is a trick. The correct translation is: "The
wage must be enough to feed a frugal and well-behaved worker." What
a revolutionary sentiment in the year 1891!

     In the next paragraph the Pope remembers that workers have
families to support. He say's: "If the worker receives a wage on
which he can support himself, his wife, and his children
becomingly, he will be able to save and to have a small capital."
He is to buy land (as that will keep him out of Socialism). I have
emphasized the significant word in this passage, as the Catholic
translators again play tricks with it. And if the reader finds my
translation of it ambiguous I reply that it is deliberately
ambiguous in the original. The Latin here is poor and unusual --
just for the sake of vagueness. As a matter of fact the official
clerical biographer of Leo XIII, Msgr. T'Serelaes, says that the
Pope's references to a living wage led everywhere to stormy
disputes as to what precisely he meant, and a Belgian archbishop
wrote to Rome for a clarification of them. He got none. So we may
dismiss the gems of social wisdom of Leo XIII and the dishonest
comments of American apologists who tamper with the text and
conceal the fact that through one of the Congregations of
Cardinals, of which the Pope is the head, Leo XIII in 1902 recanted
his "Charter," and ordered Catholic workers to quit talking about
the rights of Labor!
                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               11

               THE CHURCH THE ENEMY OF THE WORKERS

     According to these apologists Leo's "Immortal" utterance
remained the Roman standard on such matters until 1931, when Pius
XI, in the encyclical Quadragestme anno re-affirmed and developed
its teaching; and these two declarations are the wisest and
soundest of all counsels on the great issue of Capital and Labor.
But, as I have already said, while these apologists talk very
fulsomely about the encyclical of 1931 they, as far as I can
discover never translate it. There is certainly no translation
issued by the British Catholic authorities and I cannot trace any
in America, though the essential meaning of an "encyclical" letter
is that it is addressed to the whole Catholic world, and the
hierarchy in each country is to publish a translation of it. Dr.
Ryan, the Catholic oracle on social questions, translated all the
earlier encyclicals of Pius XI but did not touch this one.

     I explained in an earlier booklet why this "great" encyclical
is so scurvily treated by Catholics and was almost ignored by the
press. It tells Catholics that the corporative state -- Fascism, in
plain English -- is the true model in economic matters and must be
enforced when the authorities are Catholics! I will again give a
faithful summary of it, but first let us get the true historical
framework.

     There was not, as the apologist's claim, a continuity of Papal
policy. There was exactly the opposite. Not only did Rome, as I
have said, formally reverse its policy, but that policy had so
palpably failed that the three Popes who followed Leo XIII never
endorsed it. I have shown elsewhere that the Church of Rome
continued to lose to the Socialists. In Germany the Socialist vote,
which had risen to 1,427,298 in 1890 had increased to 2,107,076 by
1898; and it was chiefly in Germany that the Pope had expected good
results from his encyclical. In France the number of Socialists
doubled between 1893 and 1900. In Austria the vote rose from
750,000 in 1890 to 1,041,948 in 1907. And Socialism began to spread
in Italy itself. The vote rose from 27,000 in 1892 to 175,000 in
1900. The Church, losing heavily, continued to denounce Socialism
and to permit local churches to experiment in Christian Socialism,
as we shall see later. Then came the war, the Russian Revolution,
and the rapid spread of Atheistic Communism as well as Socialism,

     The desperate officials at the Vatican learned, however, as
time went on that the modern world was not necessarily committed to
radical and democratic principles. A very large proportion of the
middle class as well as the wealthy were alarmed at the threat to
"private enterprise," or the chance of making a fortune, and, while
these men had in the 19th Century provided the backbone of the
anti-clerical party everywhere, they now sought clerical as well as
conservative allies against Bolshevism. To win a good support in
the working class they joined in the cry that Bolshevism set out to
destroy religion, and therefore threatened civilization, and their
press echoed the libels against and grossly misrepresented Russia.
So there was formed the grand anti-Bolshevik alliance of ministers
and morons, bankers and bandits, journalists, and Jesuits all over
the world. The Vatican dropped its coquetting with Russia and, as
we saw in the first series, entered into a brazen alliance with the
gangs of criminals who were the nucleus groups of the next
movement.


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               12

               THE CHURCH THE ENEMY OF THE WORKERS

     So you know what to expect of an encyclical on the workers
composed by the present aristocratic Pope, who was then Secretary
of State, in 1931. "Quadragesimo anno" means "in the fortieth year"
(since Leo's encyclical), and is really an amazing, suggestion of
continuity of policy. The Pope recalls the work of Leo. There was
vast and increasing misery amongst the workers -- in the leading
countries they had, as a matter of fact, had their real wage
doubled or trebled in half a century -- and "the eyes of all were
turned to the Chair of Peter." Leo issued his marvelous encyclical,
which "owed nothing to either Liberalism or Socialism" -- its best
points were, we saw, platitudes of benevolent Liberalism -- but was
inspired by the genius of the Pope and Catholic teaching. The world
was "stupefied at the novelty of his teaching," which "overthrew
all the idols of Liberalism," and the message produced the most
salutary fruits everywhere. These Liberals had done a little for
the workers, It is true, but it was the Pope's encyclical that the
workers had to thank for all the social legislation that was passed
after 1891 and for the full establishment of Trade Unions, which
the Liberals had opposed.

     After devoting a quarter of the long letter to this childish
theme the Pope says that he is going to develop Leo's principles.
He does not even hint at the retraction. At great length he proves
that the right of private ownership is based on moral principles,
so Socialism is immoral. "No good Catholic can be a good
Socialist." As to Communism it is beneath discussion. Capital and
Labor are equally indispensable, and the product must be "justly"
divided; but he does not go a step beyond Leo in defining what a
"just wage" is. The workers must have unions, but there must be no
class-war, and in view of the need for harmonious cooperation a new
type of union or "syndicate" which has lately appeared deserves
attention. There must be unions of both workers and employers and
conferences of delegates from each side. The worker is quite free
to belong or not belong to the syndicate, but he has to pay the
fees in any case. The Pope, who has the Italian model before him,
omits to say that if a worker does not join the union he will get
no labor-ticket. Strikes are forbidden, and if the two sides cannot
agree the government must intervene. But if they will all join the
Catholic Church and reform their morals the machine will march on
oiled wheels.

     In other words, Mussolini's Corporative State is the ideal,
and from Slovakia to Peru the new Catholic countries are adopting
it and expressly quoting this encyclical as the reason. Did or did
not the Pope know that Mussolini devised this economic structure
simply in order to have both industrialists and workers in his
power when the time came for war-industries and forced loans?
Obtuse as the Vatican is in such matters the clergy must have knows
this, and must have known also that, while the industrialists
really suffered in the matter of forced loans to the government the
workers were enslaved and impoverished. So now you know why, though
Catholic apologists in America insist that the papal encyclicals
are the grand Charters of Labor they are so very reticent about
this latest official utterance on the workers' rights.





                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               13

               THE CHURCH THE ENEMY OF THE WORKERS

                           Chapter III

          THE ACTUAL RECORD OF THE BLACK INTERNATIONAL

     Leo XIII, we saw, opened his solemn pronouncement to the world
with a summary of social history which was as near to the truth as
Cape Cod is to Tierra del Fuego. I do not for a moment suggest that
he knew this but felt it quite safe to give his fantastic version
of European history to Catholics who are not allowed to read the
truth. Do not misunderstand me. Apologists and missionaries of the
Black International -- lots of them -- do lie. Many of them in
America who repeat the Pope's words are compelled by their task to
read, and give in their writings sufficient proof that they have
read, ordinary expert works on the history of the struggle of the
workers in modern times. But you would not expect a Pope to have
leisure for that sort of thing. In fact if he knew the historical
truth he might not be able to write those sonorous and vapid
generalizations which Catholics mistake for deep or inspired
thought. In the next book we shall see some of these highly-
poisoned gems of historical fiction from an earlier encyclical of
Leo XIII. He writes history (and economics) like a devout nun. The
workers, we found him saying, were happy and prosperous under the
gilds, which the Church had inspired, until the French Revolution.
Then "irreligion" made the world of employers callous and brutal.
Nothing was substituted for the protection of the gilds, and. ...
Well there you are. That is why the workers of the last century
were so exploited. You have only to bring back the employers to the
true Church (as in that country which I described in the first
chapter) and the world of Labor will take on the brightness and
warmth of a garden in spring.

     Except for the howler about the gilds this is really what
Catholic apologists commonly say on the subject. The Church "broke
the fetters of the slave" and brought light and justice to the
workers of the pagan world. In due time -- five or six centuries
later -- it created the gilds which spread a rich religious mantle
of protection over the workers of Europe. Protestantism destroyed
the protection -- the little difficulty about what happened in the
Catholic half of Europe may (and had better be) disregarded -- and
so the arrival of the Industrial Era found them the helpless prey
of the exploiters. The world must return to the principles of the
Middle Ages when the workers were so happy.

     The real record of the Church in relation to the workers can
be summed up even more shortly than that, for it is much nearer to
the truth to say that the Church was comprehensively indifferent to
the condition of the workers from the time it won power until Leo
wrote his "great" Charter of their Rights. That condition varied
with the economic development of Europe but until at least the
French Revolution it was one of galling subjection and
exploitation, and the Church never condemned this. It is a long
story for a short chapter, but I may point out the fallacy or the
untruth of the chief statements on which the claim of the apologist
is based. And if I have here to be very brief and rather dogmatic
it may be advisable to explain to some of my readers that I have
dealt with these points and given the proper authorities in several
of my Little Blue Books and in my True Story of the Roman Catholic 
Church.

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               14

               THE CHURCH THE ENEMY OF THE WORKERS

     Catholic writers used to boast how the Church was communistic
and anti-rich from its infancy, but they have done their best
recently to make the word Communism stink in folk's nostrils so
they drop this argument. It would be as bad as boasting how
Catholic commercial travelers, or their medieval equivalent, used
to lock their wives in "girdles of chastity" when they set out on
their rounds. In any case it is false. The theory is based upon a
statement about one particular church in Acts, which even many
theologians consider a pious romance. Paul's letters are the
earliest documents, and they reflect a division of classes, with
rich slave-owners and even imperial officials. In fact Catholic
literature includes wealthy relatives of the Emperor Vespasian in
the Roman Church.

     More important is the claim about slavery; and let me say at
once that it is one of the most blatantly untruthful claims the
apologists make. No Pope, no Father of the Church, no body of
churchmen ever condemned slavery until the 18th Century. St.
Augustine, the dominant oracle of western or Roman Christendom,
expressly defended it as of divine appointment (City of God, Book
XlX, eh. XV), and Thomas Aquinas and all the other Schoolmen
followed Augustine. There is not an expert work on the subject that
does not explain that the old type of slavery was destroyed by the
economic collapse of the Roman Empire, and that before that time
Roman moralists and Emperors had done a great deal for the slave.

     After the year 500 the workers of Europe are called in our
modern literature "serfs," but the reader is rarely warned that
still for centuries all literature was Latin, and there are not
different words in Latin for "slave" and "serf." The workers were
-- and the Popes from 600 onward owned vast numbers of them -- just
servi as they had been under paganism, and Vinogradov, one of the
best historical sociologists of recent times, says that they were
in law and fact, "slaves." They were bought and sold like cattle,
and no law protected them from cruelty. So the only real change
when the Roman Church came to dominate Europe in the 5th Century
was that, whereas in the Roman Empire, two workers out of three had
been free (See Darrow's Slavery in the Roman Empire), literate, and
almost pampered, in the new Europe not one worker in ten was free
or literate or had a life of elementary comfort and decency.

     This "era of the serfs" lasted until the 12th or 13th Century,
when the majority were emancipated. Again there is no modern expert
who does not trace this emancipation to what we may broadly call
economic causes. The nobles sold freedom to immense bodies of serfs
so that they could go on the looting expeditions of the Crusaders
or enjoy the more luxurious life which Arabs had taught Europe.
Kings emancipated bodies of serfs to help fight their rebellious
nobles: nobles emancipated them to fight the kings or other nobles.
Abbeys and bishops were, says the Catholic historian Muratori, the
last to emancipate them, saying that they must not "alienate Church
property." At the same time Europe was rapidly recovering
economically and far larger bodies of craftsman were required in
the towns (which, for the same reasons, now got charters of
liberty).




                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               15

               THE CHURCH THE ENEMY OF THE WORKERS

     The famous gilds had begun long before this, and the Church,
instead of having inspired them, tried for more than a century to
suppress them. They seem to have been formed by the workers on the
model of the unions (colleges) of the old Greek and Roman workers,
traces of which survived. I have elsewhere quoted decrees from the
Capitularies of Charlemagne and later Church Councils showing how
drastically the Church condemned them. It could not suppress so it
appropriated them, and for several centuries they certainly helped
the workers. That is to say, the skilled workers. Writers on the
gilds (Gross, Walford, etc.) do not remind the reader that while in
the towns even the prostitutes had gilds and walked in the sacred
processions (of course, the writers I have named do not tell this),
the agricultural workers, who were at least four-fifths of the
workers of Europe, had none or any other kind of protection.
Further, every single real expert on any country in Europe during
this period, the so-called Age of Chivalry, the best part of the
Middle Ages (1100 to 1400), agrees that the lords and landowners
regarded the workers as dirt under their feet, robbing and
torturing them barbarously. It was an age of wild license, of
fiendish cruelty, and you can imagine -- or read Eccardus for
Germany, Brissot for France, and Thorold Rogers or Traile for
England, the chief authorities on the workers -- how the unarmed
mass of the people fared.

     All the leading historical experts on the period use the same
language as Professor A. Luchaire, the highest authority on France
in the 13th Century. He says (Social France at the Time of Philippe
Auguste) that "feudalism seemed to take a ferocious delight in
seeing flames consume burgher's house's and the villains [workers]
who lived in them" (p. 5); that the knight or noble "was almost
everywhere a brutal and pillaging soldier" (p. 249); and that "the
noble had an untameable antipathy to and a profound contempt of the
villain: that is, for the serf, peasant, laborer, citizen, or
burgher" (p. 271). Such was France, the most advanced country in
Europe, in what Catholics call the most beautiful part of the
Middle Ages; and every leading authority on Italy, England, or
Germany at the time gives exactly the same picture. Pope Leo XIII
had as naive an idea of the time as has the schoolma'am who talks
to her class about the beautiful Age of Chivalry and the Knights
Errant. And in our age of historical scholarship this sort of thing
is solemnly made the basis of a social argument by the spiritual
leaders of 200,000,000 folk and is most respectfully treated by
editorial writers and essayists.

     It would be pertinent to show that while the workers who were
subject to the Pope were thus as unprotected from the brutality of
their "betters" as the slaves of old -- indeed less than the slaves
of Rome from the time of the Emperor Hadrian -- and lived for the
most part (on the land) in sordid and brutalizing conditions, the
workers of Arab Spain, who cannot have been far short in number of
the workers of the whole of Christian Europe, were relatively happy
and prosperous and generally educated. But I cannot enlarge on that
in this little sketch. Let me just say, on the strength of the
research and the general consensus of authorities in ancient Rome,
medieval Europe, and Arab Spain which I give in a dozen works, that
the period which the Pope and his apologists choose as the Golden
Age of the workers was for them the blackest age, apart from Spain,


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               16

               THE CHURCH THE ENEMY OF THE WORKERS

between their good condition in the Roman Empire and the
improvements they have won in modern times. None but Catholic
apologists and a few American teachers of history who play up to
them now write such trash about the Middle Ages. The period had
great art, but four-fifth's of the workers, scattered outside the
cities, never even saw this.

     It is true that the condition of the growing body of
industrial workers became harder in some respects after the
Reformation. The apologists make a ridiculous attempt to connect
this with (at least in England) the suppression of the monasteries,
the chief effect of which for the workers was that crowds of men
and women who had idly hung about the fat monasteries for food
instead of working for it had now the choice of working or
starving. In point of fact Protestant England set up a system of
Poor Relief which, crude as it was -- like most government measures
300 years ago -- did discriminate to some extent between "sturdy
beggars" and the real needy.

     But the answer to any Catholic attempt to make capital out of
the fact that, as trade and industry expanded, the lawyers, in the
interest of the rich, made the law harsher against the workers,
especially in regard to unions, is easily found when we compare
Catholic and Protestant countries. The three countries of Europe
which sank most notably from the best level of the Middle Ages
after the Reformation were beyond any question Catholic Italy,
Spain, and Portugal. There the lot of the worker fell to the level
at which we found it in the first chapter and remained at that
level until our time. The exceptions only strengthen my point. When
anti-Papal statesmen took over Italy from the Pope and his puppets
at Naples the status of the workers began to rise -- until
Mussolini shared his power with the Pope. In Spain and Portugal
also there were periods of anti-clerical Liberalism or (1932-6)
Socialism during which the condition of the workers was improved
and schools for their children were opened. Under the present
Papal-Fascist regime they have fallen back toward a condition of
ill-paid illiterate serfdom. These are platitude's of socio-
political history.

     I have not spokes of France because it did not, like Italy,
Spain, and Portugal, build round itself a Chinese Wall to protect
its Catholic population from the taint of non-Catholic influences.
It was open to receive ideas from England, Holland, and Germany,
and it saw a considerable growth of skepticism. Even its clergy
were remarkably independent of Rome. Yet it remained predominantly
Catholic, and it retained medieval vices (torture's, etc.) in
proportion to its Catholicism. Here I have to notice only the
condition of the workers. There is no dispute about it. Apologists
find a second Catholic Golden Age in the days of Louis XIV: a
vicious, selfish, scandalous monarch who regarded the people only
as a source of wealth for his corrupt court, if you read French try
to see the documents in Martin's authoritative history relating to
the appalling condition of the agricultural workers when Louis was
building his palaces. Brissot, the chief French authority on the
history of the workers, shows that the wage even of the skilled
workers fell under Louis XIV to about 38 cents a day (of 12 to 14
hours) and the price of food rose.


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               17

               THE CHURCH THE ENEMY OF THE WORKERS

     But their condition on the eve of the Revolution is well
known, and it is equally well known -- in fact eagerly claimed by
apologists who know as little about the French Revolution as they
do about the Russian -- that anti-clericals educated the people up
to and inspired that inauguration of the first attempt in
Christendom to redeem and uplift the workers. People will not
understand our own time unless they see that we still live in the
new age, an age of struggle against privilege for freedom,
democracy, enlightenment, and justice to the workers, which opened
at the French Revolution; in a sense you might say the American
Revolution, since it was in some respects more than political
though in just these respects its roots were in French anti-Papal
literature.

     I hope some day to write a worthy history of this period.
Already for 150 years men and women, touched by the vision of a
wiser and juster social order, have fought for freedom, justice,
and enlightenment. A million of them have lost their lives in the
struggle, yet but for the rousing of Russia the race in most
countries would have lost all that it had won in those 150 years of
sweat and blood. Even now that victory is certain in the sense that
the nests of pirates in Berlin, Rome, and Tokyo will be destroyed
the race makes no totalitarian war against them because so few
people understand the struggle in all its range. The coalition of
the Roman Church with the bandits is concealed from the majority --
I just received a letter from a distinguished clergyman, no lover
of Rome, who writes that I will startle England if I can prove that
connection! -- whereas, if you know the whole period, it is the
logical and almost inevitable policy of the Papacy. And with so
much hidden and the perspective distorted some of the leaders in
the present fight, men who mouth about freedom and democracy, hope
to save the Roman Church from chastisement or loss of power because
it will help to put kings back on their thrones, restore privilege,
and cheek the aspirations of the workers.

     I have tried in all my works for the past ten years to get
people to see the events of contemporary life in this historical
perspective, but I must here confine myself to the question of the
workers. The French Revolution proved a false dawn of the new age,
and when it and the compromise of the Napoleonic regime were
destroyed the fight had to begin again, under a dense cloud of
reaction. Let us say that the period from about 1830 to 1930 was
one of increasing victory for the worker's. The real wage in the
larger lndustrialized states was trebled. Universal free education
was won, and this meant at all events the erection of a ladder by
which the abler workers might ascend to a higher level. Immense
social services -- hygienic, medical, recreational, educative, and
financial -- were provided. The right to unions was almost
completely established. It all fell far short of the ideal, but let
us be just. That age which the Pope blandly blames for all that is
wrong, which he represents as undoing the justice won for the
workers in earlier Catholic ages was one of the most progressive
that the world had yet seen; for the workers of imperial Rome had
not had to fight for such privileges as they had.





                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               18

               THE CHURCH THE ENEMY OF THE WORKERS

     Well, what share has the Church of Rome had in the victorious
struggle? Should we be far away from the historical truth if we 
said, None? Apologists search the darker lanes of recent history
for some obscure priest or layman -- generally in bad odor in his
Church at the time -- who dared to say a word for the improvement
of the condition of the workers, for the emancipation of the
Slaves, for justice to women, and so on. That neither the Vatican
nor any national branch of the Church joined in the great word
until the last decade of the 19th Century, when wholesale apostasy
of the workers alarmed the Black International, they have to grant.
But this thimble-rigging game of claiming the credit for "the
Church" when one man is honest and asking us to blame "not the
Church but the individual" when a hundred are dishonest begins to
be resented even by the Catholic laity.

     I made a broad examination of the mighty campaign for reform
-- which means to rid the world finally of medievalism -- during
the last 150 years in my recent 'How Freethinkers made Notable
Contributions to Civilization' (1938). I showed that in periods
when Catholics regarded Freethinkers as an insignificant and
negligible minority they provided the great majority of the leaders
in every branch of the reform-movement. A Catholic survey of that
magnificent fight for man, the grandest of all epics, naming all
Catholics in Europe or America who made any such notable
contribution would be a farce, yet all the time the Church was
boasting that it ruled a third of the white race. Even the men who
are claimed, like the Chartist leader in England Bronterre O'Brien,
were apostates in most cases.

     Or take, as we have done before, the contrast of Catholic and
Protestant lands. In the first chapter I distributed countries, as
they were before the war threw everything into confusion, into
three groups. I do not imagine that any student of social matters
will question the general distribution, and quarrels about the
exact position of this or that country do not affect the
conclusion. The workers enjoy the best conditions where Catholicism
has no influence on public life and the worst conditions where it
has its greatest influence. They are worst paid and least protected
by law, and have the feeblest social services in the lands where
the ruling class profess docility to the Pope. In Russia, where
Catholicism simply does not exist, the workers have the finest
position they ever had in history, and they were rapidly advancing,
when the Pope's war against them broke out, to a level higher than
is or ever was, found in any other civilization. Whether you agree
to that or no the broad truth remains; the position of the workers
rose in proportion as Papal influence fell. I wonder if there is
any normally-minded Catholic worker in America who will question my
distribution of the leading countries of the world according to the
status of the workers and the Catholic element in the country, or
will claim that his Church has anything to do with the high
position, from material and historical reasons, of the workers of
America. Yet these Catholic workers cannot open one of their books
on social questions without reading that the two encyclicals I
analyzed show the Popes as the beat friends of Labor.





                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               19

               THE CHURCH THE ENEMY OF THE WORKERS

     In other words, we have in this controversy, as in so many
others that concern the Church, all the facts on one side and all 
the rhetoric on the other. The Papal encyclicals are not merely
rhetoric but platitudinous rhetoric. That of Leo XIII in those
passages of it which won most attention just took up and, with a
certain amount of vagueness, repeated demands which had for decades
been considered elementary in serious discussions of such matters.
Was there, in fact, on the capitalist side any responsible writer
who said that "overwork was just as long as you did not specify the
hours for any industry" -- at that time the burning question, which
the Pope carefully avoided, was the eight-hour day -- or who
questioned that the worker had a right to a decent wage as long as
you refused to say what in any industry a decent wage was? And the
second Encyclical officially took back the slight concessions --
already quietly withdrawn -- of the first because it put the
workers under a Corporative State, in which any demands of theirs
are finally settled by the employer's or the government. Both
encyclicals, moreover, lay heavy stress on something which is
anathema to every social student. They say that the rich justify
the larger share they take of the wealth produced if they give
generously in charity to the poor.

     If the apologist falls back, as he usually does, upon the fact
that the Church has always sternly insisted on justice his case is
worse than ever. Such preaching is, and always was, barren. There
is a Catholic church in New York which the Tammany leaders have
attended for the last 100 years, and the services and sermons have
spoken of justice as often as they did in other chapels. Under the
Pope's nose, in Italy, Catholic employers made the vilest use, in
the sulphur mines, of child labor that you would find anywhere in
Europe. Almost as sordid a use of child labor was made in the
tailoring business in Poland, and in agriculture and various
industries in Spain, Portugal, and South America. So it has been
for ages, though the employers listened Sunday after Sunday to the
Catholic gospel of justice. The ethic has been the same in all
ages; the practice has varied considerably, and the facts I have
given even in this short sketch show that the actual treatment of
the workers was always nearest to the ideal of justice where public
life was influenced by those whom the Church denounced.

                           Chapter IV

                THE COMEDY OF CHRISTIAN SOCIALISM

     I have found it necessary at this point to make a few
excursions into older history because it was impossible to ignore
the Pope's amazing statement that the workers enjoyed happier
conditions when the world was Catholic and that their modern
grievances are due to the collapse of Papal authority over a large
part of the earth. How Catholics tolerate such howlers and then
respectfully read articles in their press about the profound wisdom
and sagacity of the Popes is the one problem of Church life I have
never mastered. But let me remind the reader that this discussion
of the status of the workers is part of a broader study of the
Roman Church which we are making. The starting-point of it was:
What is the real nature of the Church of Rome, of the Black
International in particular, that it should enter into alliance 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               20
              THE CHURCH THE ENEMY OF THE WORKERS


with the vilest forces of modern times? One of the difficulties of
the general public in entertaining this is that for 40 years
Catholic apologetic works in America have loudly boasted that their
Church has always been, and especially in Papal declarations during
the last half-century, the champion of Labor against greed. We have
seen that it was, on the contrary, always in alliance with wealth
and greed and is in its present alliances merely pursuing its
normal policy.

     I imagine that after the war, when Socialism and Communism
spread once more, what is left of the Catholic Church will to a
great extent turn to what is called Christian Socialism, and we may
glance at it. The movement was, of course, never Socialistic, and
in so far as it was adopted in Catholic countries, it never used
the word Socialism. It was called Christian or Catholic Democracy
or Social Party, and its express purpose was to divert the workers
from Socialism, which Leo XIII condemned as emphatically in 1891 as
Pius XI did in 1931. The movement began in England in 1849 when
people still distinguished between the state Socialism of Marx,
which then had few adherents in Britain, and other varieties such
as Robert Owen's voluntary Socialism.

     This British movement, founded by two clergymen of the Church
of England, Charles Kingsley and F.D. Maurice, assisted by the
barrister (of the same Church) Ludlow, which borrowed the title
Socialism as it was loosely used by the Owenites, never had a large
body of adherents and did not last long. Ludlow admitted that its
chief aim was "to Christianize Socialism," or to show the workers
that they need not leave the Church because they demanded a
betterment of their condition. But it was a group of men and women
who very sincerely felt that something must be done for the workers
when the Chartist movement so sensationally collapsed in 1848 and
it did render material services in education and in helping Trade
Unions and Cooperative Societies. It was continued in the Guild of
St. Matthew, which was closely associated with the "High" or
Ritualist branch of the Church, and there was a less advanced
Christian Social Union.

     I once took the chair for a lecture by the Rev. Stewart
Headlam head of the Guild of St. Matthew, and the audience numbered
30 or 40. When we sipped a whisky and soda together afterwards he
said that he had given this eloquent lecture on "The Brotherhood of
Men under the Fatherhood of God" a score of times and got almost no
response. Why? I discreetly reminded him that the Church had taught
the Fatherhood of God just as dogmatically in the long ages of
tyranny and exploitation and suggested that perhaps the employers
reflected that since the Father condemned his children to an
eternal hell the little hell they gave their workers sometimes did
not matter much.

     I need not trace the echoes of this movement in the religious
world of America -- the Christian Labor Union of 1872, the Knights
of Labor, the Christian Social Union, etc. -- as Catholics were not
involved in them. It was in Germany, after 1870, that the movement
which we generally call Christian Socialism spread amongst the
Catholic worker's. It was, of course, not merely not Socialism but
the very opposite of it, since the sole aim was to prevent Catholic


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               21

               THE CHURCH THE ENEMY OF THE WORKERS

workers from joining the Social Democrats. The whole movement, in
Britain, America, and Germany, rather reminds us of the clergymen
who try to keep their young men and girls from wicked dance-halls
by arranging chaste dances or ping-pong games, with non-alcoholic
refreshments, in the parish hall.

     It was more serious and more resolutely Catholic when it
spread to Austria. Its appropriation of the name Socialism was in
this case peculiarly ironical. Not only had it no sincere program
of improvement of the condition of the workers but it at first
consisted of violently anti-Socialist middle-class men, and it soon
absorbed the Conservative body of Catholics. The urban workers,
especially at Vienna, were too well read in social history to be
duped by the romantic version of the Church's attitude to Labor
that the priests offered them and, as is well known, they passed
bodily to Socialism and in free elections won complete power over
Vienna and a few other towns year after year. It was particularly
exasperating for the Church because the Austrian workers were so
well behaved that it was in this case impossible to fabricate
stories of "Red atrocities." I spent a week amongst them at the
time when the depression and the mutilation of the country by
Versailles had brought upon Vienna such economic stringency that,
police-officials assured me, the patience of the workers was
strained to breaking point. I saw 10,000 armed police drawn across
a short section of the Ring between the rich inner city and an
industrial suburb. But not a clash occurred, though I verified that
half the workers suffered grave privation.

     It was therefore the policy of the church to hold the ignorant
and priest-ridden agricultural workers, which would ensure its
control of the national government and so give it, in case of need,
power over the Socialist municipal governments. The title
"Socialist" became farcical when the Catholic nobles and land-
owners were enlisted in the party and their influence over the
rural population secured, so we need not pay any attention to the
few ameliorative measures, such as agricultural cooperatives, which
they passed. But the story, as it developed, is so characteristic
of Vatican strategy that it is vitally relevant to the point we
are. considering.

     In the stress of the terrible experiences of 1918 and 1919 the
so-called Christian Socialists cooperated amiably with the Social
Democrats in reconstituting the beggared Austrian state on a
democratic basis, and then for a time they became, with this
immense rural backing, the chief party in the country. It was led
by a clerical professor, Seipel, whose position was much the same
as that of Dr. Ryan in the American Church. But with the capture of
the national government by the party it suited the Vatican to
forget that churchmen must not interfere in polities -- as a matter
of fact the Church never sacrifices a single opportunity to put a
priest at the head of a political party -- and Selpel became
Chancellor of the Austrian Republic and brought his party back to
the old bitter hostility to the Social Democrats.

     The situation that immediately ensued was falsely represented,
as all Socialist constructive work was in the world-press and by
the Church, but historians of the period have made it clear. While 
the Popes were blandly explaining that they opposed Socialism 

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               22

               THE CHURCH THE ENEMY OF THE WORKERS

because it mould not work and they therefore acted in the interest
of the race Austria presented the spectacle of a bankrupt and
totally inefficient national Catholic government, under a priest,
kept alive by loans from the League of Nations -- or subsidies from
the power which equally dreaded the success of the Socialists --
while Vienna, under its Socialist administration and refused any
share in the international loans to the country, did such splendid
work for the people (especially in education and re-housing) that
an editorial in a Liberal London paper, the News-Chronicle
(February 12. 1935) pronounced it "as close to the ideal Platonic
Republic as the world has ever seen." I may recall that the present
Pope, who represented the Vatican in Germany for 12 years, was
familiar with all this, yet in the encyclical Quadragesimo anno,
which he issued in the name of the late Pope, he dwelt on the
futility and danger to civilization of Socialism in the usual
Catholic manner.

     Rome has only one effective answer in such cases, violence,
and in an earlier booklet of the past series I told what happened.
The Christian Socialist government, led by the priest-ridden and
piously unscrupulous Dollfuss, allied itself with the Fascists and
destroyed Social Democracy. It was the time when Hitler was
supposed to leave Austria in Mussolini's sphere of influence, and
the Papal encyclical of 1931 ordered Catholics, in effect, to adopt
the corporative state. As Hitler made public his real plans and his
growing power the Austrian Catholics split, many joining the Nazi
Greater Germany movement; and, when the triumph of the Nazis was
put beyond question the head of the Austrian Church, Cardinal
Innitzer, threw off the mask and delivered the country to the Beast
of Berchtesgaden. The long, and heroic struggle of the Austrian
workers was over. They passed under the vile tyranny of the Pope's
ideal corporative state and the Gestapo.

     Not less instructive is the development in Italy. Socialism
began to grow rapidly in that country in the last decade of the
19th Century. The situation here was peculiar because the Popes
had, since the Italian government had taken over the Papal States,
forbidden Catholics to take any part in national politicks. Leo
XIII had permitted them to enter municipal Polities and in 1905 the
sagacious Vatican was forced to acknowledge its blunder and remove
the ban altogether. Leo had, we saw, sourly ordered Italian
Catholics in 1902 to drop all concern about the living wage and
industrial betterment and concentrate on the recovery of the
Temporal Power. The removal of the political ban reopened the
question of social activity, and a People's Party, a variant of
Christian Socialism, was established. Led by the priest Murri, it
was violently anti-Socialist -- see his work Battaglie d'Oggi --
but it appealed to the people against a middle class which Murri
not unfairly represented as solidly opposed to the Church and had
to make increasing concessions to the demands for justice to the
workers. But Murri, though secretary to a cardinal, went on to
write in scathing terms about the higher Roman clergy themselves
and was excommunicated.

     The rapid advance of Socialism and Communism after the war
compelled the Vatican to reconsider its attitude and permit a new
extension of the Popular Party, or the Catholic Union of the People
of Italy. Women now had the franchise in Italy, and with their aid 

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               23

               THE CHURCH THE ENEMY OF THE WORKERS

the union might provide a political counterpoise to Socialism, It
could do this only by making concessions to the reform-program, and
under a new priest-leader, Luigi Sturzo, it became less and less
ecclesiastical and more exigent in its demands for the workers.
Then came the rise of Fascism and the spirited fight of the
Fascists against the Socialists and Communists. Large numbers of
the Catholic party joined the Fascists -- one of them was in
Mussolini's first cabinet -- since they understood that the
Church's primary object was the destruction of Socialism, and
helped to put the Duce on the throne. The Vatican followed its
usual policy of having representatives in both camps as long as the
issue was doubtful.

     Seldes describes the situation in his work 'The Vatican,'
which is so lenient to Rome that I at first mistook its author for
a Catholic. In 1922 and 1923 the Catholic peasants of the Union
cracked Fascist skulls even more than the Socialists and Communists
did in the daily fights. The struggle continued as fiercely as ever
although Mussolini seized power in 1922. We are again reminded of
the real usurpation of power by Mussolini and Hitler who never won
more than a minority of the people in free elections. Fascism in
Italy was far outnumbered by the Catholic, Liberal, Socialist, and
Communist opposition. And we are equally reminded of the evil
wrought by the Vatican, Mussolini sent envoys to it with a promise
to make concessions to the Church if the Pope would condemn the
Popular Party. Alternatively he threatened Church property if the
Pope did not. So in June 1923 the Pope acted. Sturzo resigned his
leadership of the Party on the ground that priests must not
interfere in politics and retired to a monastery. The Party lost
ground, and at the final reconciliation of Mussolini with the
Church and his rich reward of it for its services it was entirely
sacrificed. The workers of Italy, who had fought for their rights
for 140 years and sacrificed hundreds of thousands of lives passed,
with the Pope's solemn blessing, into the ignoble slavery of the
Corporative State.

     It will now be apparent why, in spite of the tragic features
of the story, I speak of the Comedy of Christian Socialism. or
prevent its growth by luring workers to stay at a half-way house in
that direction, and in most forms it was bitterly opposed to
Socialism. This is so far acknowledged that in most forms it
avoided the title Socialist and preferred Social Union or Christian
Democracy; but if any reader is inclined to suggest on that account
that I have no right to include these Catholic and Protestant
movements under the title Christian Socialism let him consult, for
instance, so authoritative a work as The Encyclopedia of the Social
Sciences.

     In speaking of comedy, however, I am thinking of the policy of
the Vatican in its occasional use of the movement. Pope Leo XIII
discovers in the twentieth year of his pontificate that Liberalism
has ruined the excellent status of the workers which his Church had
secured. That is comic enough, as I explained it is still more
ridiculous in the eye of any serious student of such matters
because he knows that as long as the mass of the workers were
uneducated it was mainly left to middle-class Liberals to win the
first installments of justice for them. Even Socialist writers 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               24

               THE CHURCH THE ENEMY OF THE WORKERS

often call the middle half of the 19th Century the Age of the
Benevolent Bourgeois. Irony apart, not only were great Socialist
pioneers like Marx, Engels, and Lasalle, middle-class men but there
is a very honorable list of Liberals in the fight -- the fight
against the Conservatives and the Churches -- to liberate the
workers from their medieval bondage. In England for instance, it
was middle-class Liberals like Owen, Place, Bentham, Brougham, etc.
-- who won education, shorter hours, and less ghastly working
conditions for them.

     It was the rise of Socialism and the threat to private
enterprise which caused the Liberals to raise the cry (as
shibboleth) that we must have "evolution not revolution" and
propose reform by installments. In other words, they invented the
program of moderate industrial reforms -- a living wage, shorter
hours, factory and workshop inspection, weekly rest and occasional
holidays, etc. -- which the Christian Socialists took over. What is
more amusing is that it was just this program which the Pope took
over from the Liberals, whom he heavily censured for their
wickedness to the workers, in 1891. The three points of his Charter
were commonplaces of Liberal literature by that time, and the
better Liberals had got beyond them and were demanding or favoring
schemes of insurance, pensions, and so on.

     But the ignorance of the literature of the subject displayed
in these Papal Encyclicals is well known to students of these
matters. What is of more interest here is that American Catholic
apologists are still substantially in the stage of Leo XIII and
still quote his encyclical as a grand revolutionary utterance. The
whole "social welfare" movement of the American Papal Church has
the same aim as Leo had, to distract men from Socialism or to keep
up the working-class membership of the Church, and, though some of
its writers go farther than others, if there is anything like an
agreed body of teaching endorsed by the bishops it certainly does
not go beyond advanced Liberalism. It is now quite common for
writers who are Liberals even in the political sense to say that
the age of Lassez-faire is over and the state must interfere in the
interest of the workers, but Popes and American Catholic writers on
social questions talk as if they had not noticed the developments
of the last quarter of a century.

     The broad plea of the apologists, when they are confronting
the workers and not preaching to their richer congregations, is
that the Church in its wisdom has established the truth midway,
between Liberalism and Socialism. I need not speak here of
Coughlin, who does not represent the Church and will be disowned
whenever it becomes expedient. The general position is that
Liberalism does not go far enough while Socialism goes too far. It
enhances the comic aspect of the situation if you examine the
grounds on which they oppose Socialism. With a dry medieval
pedantry that must equally amuse the professor of ethics and the
professor of economics they prove by elaborate arguments that the
right of private ownership is asserted by "natural moral law," of
which God is the author, so Socialists who deny it are sinful or
immoral. It is like chewing sawdust and has as much relation to the
actual problems of life as have arguments for a flat earth. You
would hardly expect verbal camouflage of this sort to hide even
from a sophomore the fact that Rome really hates Socialism because 

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               25

               THE CHURCH THE ENEMY OF THE WORKERS

freethinking generally accompanies it and because the use of the
Church's international machinery to check the growth of Socialism
keeps it in alliance with the rich, the privileged and the
powerful. The Catholic position never was between Liberalism and
Socialism, but Rome found it expedient to let bodies of Catholics
take up a position between Liberalism and complete reaction.

     The irony is now complete. The Church swings back to reaction
under the impression that it is going to recover world-power and
leaves the American apologists looking very foolish as they still
chant the praises of the Papal Charters of Labor. It was possible
to conceal from the public the way in which Leo XIII emphatically
withdrew his Charter of the Rights of the Workers. This was done in
a letter to the bishops and priests of Italy, and the foreign
press, which had been enthusiastic about Leo's "revolutionary"
utterance in 1891, would offend Catholics if it noticed the
retraction of 1902. The same attempt was made to keep the American
(and British) public unaware of the really revolutionary encyclical
of 1931, in which Catholic workers are told that they must join
syndicates or corporations which are overshadowed by corporations
of the employers and drastically subject to the state, which will
not permit strikes. I have read French and German translations of
this encyclical but found none in English, though the very idea of
an encyclical is that it is addressed to all nations and must be
translated into all their languages.

     The wheel has turned full circle. For fourteen centuries the
Church was on the side of the masters and had nothing to say about
the pitiful condition of the workers. Owing to the victory of
reaction over the French Revolution this lasted until the middle of
the 19th Century. Some of the Churches then began to propose half-
measures to conciliate the workers, but the Church of Rome was the
last to patronize even these half measures. At the end of the last
century, however, the Vatican began to wonder whether the
emancipation of the workers was not, like democracy, likely to be
permanent and it began to trim in such countries as it thought this
profitable. The monstrous progress of reaction and decay of
idealism in the last ten years have given it courage and it boldly
enjoins the Catholic world to run up the pirate-flag of the Fascist
state. One Catholic country after another obeys, but in America the
slick apologists conceal the Papal orders and continue to drone
that the Roman Church is, and always was, the angel with a flaming
sword that keeps the greedy and the exploiter out of their medieval
paradise.

                            Chapter V

                THE CHURCHES AND RACIAL INJUSTICE

     Some day the students of the sociology-class will puzzle over
this controversy of our time as to who helped or who did not help
workers. They will read that before the end of the 19th Century
manhood suffrage or complete democracy was established nearly
everywhere, and that the workers were something like four-fifths of
the adult voting males. Why need anybody help them? Yon know the
answer. Broadly, they helped themselves. The great advance of
social and labor legislation, of municipal services, etc., from 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               26

               THE CHURCH THE ENEMY OF THE WORKERS

1890 onward was due to their pressure. What Leo XIII said had no
more influence on the development than Emerson's essays and less
than Maeterlinck's essays. It was not until the Popes returned to
reaction that they had a real influence on contemporary life.

     The conception of the Pope as a beneficent and highly
effective moral power protecting "be weak from injustice is on a
level with the medieval myth of the knight-errant. I have read
large numbers of medieval chronicles and never came across the
figure of a knight-errant, a knight who even occasionally set out
from the castle to rescue the distressed and smite the cartiff.
Naturally it would be a left-handed compliment to their religion if
we had to say that one in a hundred of them did this, but all real
authorities on the Middle Ages seem to have found, like myself,
that the figure is a sheer myth largely founded on the silly
Spanish fiction, which Cervantes caricatures in Don Quixote. As
Prof. Medley says in Traills' Social England, if a knight met a
maid unprotected on the road he raped her; and I differ from the
learned professor only in this that according to all the leading
authorities on woman in the Middle Ages she is not likely to have
waited to be raped. In fact, if I were malicious I would press
further the parallel of the knight errant and the Pope. According
to all the historians of the time the knight spent his days roaming
the land, not to give help, but to acquire wealth in such ways. ...
But I will not be tempted to any unkind things of the Church to
which I once belonged and, stodgy as the work may be, let us return
to the statement of facts.

     And just to complete the record we may glance at other victims
of medieval oppression and exploitation who, being minorities,
really needed a champion after the workers had become strong. This
should not apply to women seeing that they are half the adult-race,
but it does; and they had the greater claim on the assistance of
the Roman Church from the fact that they have been through all the
modern age of increasing skepticism more loyal and more generous to
the priests than the men. It would seem too big a subject to engage
upon at the tall-end of a booklet but we, may simplify it. A
chapter in my How Freethinkers made Notable Contributions to
Civilization sketches the fight against injustice to woman, which
mean's far more than the refusal of political rights, and shows
that in America the leaders -- F. D'Arusmont, L. Mott, the Grimkes,
A. Kelly, L. Coleman, M.J. Gage, L.M. Child. E. Rose, H. Gardener,
C.C. Stanton, and S.B. Anthony were for the most part Deists (in
the early stage) or Atheists, and that in any case there was not a
Catholic amongst them. Priests jeered at their crusade. It was the
same in England and Europe generally. I enlisted in the fight,
lecturing and writing for the women, about 1900, and in the whole
20 years never heard of a priest or even a prominent Catholic woman
who helped. Once, near the end I was invited to address in London
the Irish (presumably Catholic) Women's Suffrage Society. I got no
audience and was told that anyway it would not have meant more than
half a dozen Catholic girls. I trust I am not misinformed but I was
told that the one nominally Catholic woman in the movement, Mrs.
Despard, had left the Church.





                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               27

               THE CHURCH THE ENEMY OF THE WORKERS

     Let us try the Jews. I read lately that there is a sort of
circus-group going about America consisting of a Catholic priest, 
a Protestant minister, and a Jewish rabbi telling from a common
platform how Christian's and Jews love each other. Adversity has
made stranger bedfellows than this holy trinity. It is just a sign
of a wintry age, for Churches. Jews, like the workers, have had to
fight themselves for emancipation from the Christian tyranny and
exploitation which lasted from the Dark Age to our own time, and
which the Pope's allies are restoring. There is a persistent
statement in Catholic literature that the knights-errant of the
Vatican always protected the Jews. From whom? Certainly not from
the Moslem, who were most friendly with them, and not, until this
perversity of human nature which we call Nazism began from the
modern skeptical states in which some Jews have grown rich and
powerful. I looked up the learned Catholic Encyclopedia and In
support of this statement of the apologists it quoted five Popes.
Look up what the Jews have to say about those five "champions" of
their race in Graetz's standard 'History of the Jews.' He shows
that four of the five made great financial profit out of the Jews
and the fifth was harsh and cruel to them but protested against the
infamous popular massacres of them.

     I have a long essay on Anti-Semitism in Christian times in No.
2 of 'The Appeal to Reason Library.' To sum it in a few lines, the
Jews were from the 5th to the 11th Century despised and badly
treated in Christian countries as the murderers of Christ, while in
Arab Spain, Sicily, and Persia they had complete freedom, except
when fanatics got power, and made equal contribution with the Arabs
to the culture and prosperity of the great civilization. From 1100
to 1500 they suffered such savage treatment in Christian countries
that the number of victims of massacres is estimated to exceed a
million. The great oracle of the Middle Ages, the Thomas Aquinas
who is now said to have been so modern in sentiment -- we will
consider that in the next book -- instructed, a Christian princess
that they were the "slaves" of Christians and it was not unjust to
seize their wealth. The Reformation brought some improvement, but
it was the growing skepticism of countries like England, Holland,
and France that inspired a more humane attitude. In short the
Church of Rome had idly contemplated a monstrous cruel racial
injustice for 1400 years and has never given a clear moral lead to
its followers, as is amply proved by the birth of modern Anti-
Semitism in Catholic Austria and the recurrence of pogroms in other
Catholic countries. It has been said in reference, to the collapse
of civilization in the Dark Age: "The Popes finished what the Huns
had begun." We may say of the sufferings of the Jews in the last
ten years: The Huns finished what the Popes began.

     Finally, there is the question of the colored folk in America.
We have here a problem the solution of which requires a delicate
balance of social sagacity and moral sentiment. When, during the
fifty years that the Roman Church in America has claimed to be a
moral power that could contribute materially, in fact uniquely, to
the national guidance have its leaders made a clear and categorical
pronouncement on the Negro question, on which whole libraries were
written? Dubois and, other spokesmen of the colored Americans have
declared that Catholics are amongst the most stubborn of their
opponents. We may surely at least say that Catholics as a body, 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               28

               THE CHURCH THE ENEMY OF THE WORKERS

clerical and lay, have shown and show no superior moral and
humanitarian feeling to others. They have insisted on the removal
of the colored folk from contact with them, often even in church,
just like others.

     The problem of the colored population in the United States is
notoriously the sequel to one of the most monstrous racial crimes
of modern times. In that crime England came to take as active a
part as Catholic countries, but it is just to take into account the
fact that it was drawn in by the vast profit which Spain and
Portugal, the originators of the traffic in African flesh and
blood, derived from it. This brought the question of black slavery
well within the sphere of Rome's moral jurisdiction and kept it
there even after Britain and America had emancipated the slaves.
Where will you find the luminous wisdom, the austere and
uncompromising idealism, of the Papacy on that subject? It emerges
clearly from all the controversy on the subject that the crime had
two ecclesiastical roots apart from the greed of Spanish and
Portuguese traders. The clergy decided that since the conversion of
the Amer-indian's was checked by the imposition of forced labor it
was expedient (for the good of the Church) to employ Africans, and
that the cruelty and misery which this involved for the Africans
was compensated by the fact that it brought them into the Church
outside of which -- as the Church then taught -- there was no
salvation.

     A point which is never made in the endless controversy on this
subject -- at least I have never found it mentioned except by the
Rev. Dr. Agate in the Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics -- is
that slavery was the more easily imposed upon the Africans because
the Church had never condemned it. Most writers on the subject
imagine a long interval between what they call ancient slavery and,
the beginning of the African slave-trade; some, in fact many,
suppose that, through the efforts of the Church of Rome, slavery
had died with the pagan Romans. There was, on the contrary, as Dr.
Agate shows, a continuous traffic in slaves. It was one of the
chief industries, in the west of England (in Irish slaves) in the
10th Century, and it flourished in north Italy until the middle of
the 15th Century, when the Turks destroyed the commerce of the
Venetians and the Genoese. The heirs of these, the Spanish and
Portuguese, merely transferred the traffic to the Atlantic. No
Papal or theological pronouncement forbade them. Thomas Aquinas
had, like Augustine, put the seal of Catholic scholarship upon it.

     As to the abolition of the traffic we never find the Roman
Church mentioned amongst the claimants of merit. It was not even a
moral problem in Catholic lands until the French revolutionaries,
whom the Pope anathematized, condemned it in their colonies. The
moral guide of the universe failed to see what a Protestant
apologist has called "the blackest crime of modern times." It was
only in the light of a skeptical age that the Popes realized that
the brotherhood of man implied that all men, white, black, and
yellow, Are brothers and had a right to freedom and a decent life.

     We might extend this inquiry over other fields. When did Rome
condemn that cruel and stultifying employment of children which
continued through Catholic ages and survives in full horror in 
Catholic countries? Why is there not a word of rebuke of it in the 

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               29

               THE CHURCH THE ENEMY OF THE WORKERS

wonderful Charters of the Rights of Labor? The people of half of
Europe are virtually enslaved to Germany today, the whips of the
Gestapo replacing the whips of the ancient galley-slave overseers.
What has Rome said about it? Japan astonishes the world by the
savagery of its treatment of the helpless, and the Vatican enters
into closer diplomatic relations with it. But we will be content to
have made one point clear. The Vatican has never helped the workers
because its natural alliance is with the exploiters of the workers.
Its apologists plead that it must look always to "the good of the
Church." Yes, just as the managers of a corporation assign as the
first principle of all employers to work for the good of the firm
-- for its advancement in wealth and power. So it has always been;
and if the line of Papal policy has shown some strange deviations
and meanderings in the last 50 years the cause is quite clearly
seen in the development of contemporary life. For the moment it is
back on the straight line. The corporative state makes and works a
serf under the feudal tyranny of masters and pastors.








                          ****     ****


    Reproducible Electronic Publishing can defeat censorship.



   The Bank of Wisdom is a collection of the most thoughtful,
scholarly and factual books. These computer books are reprints of
suppressed books and will cover American and world history; the
Biographies and writings of famous persons, and especially of our
nations Founding Fathers. They will include philosophy and
religion. all these subjects, and more, will be made available to
the public in electronic form, easily copied and distributed, so
that America can again become what its Founders intended --

                 The Free Market-Place of Ideas.


                          ****     ****


   The Bank of Wisdom is always looking for more of these old,
hidden, suppressed and forgotten books that contain needed facts
and information for today. If you have such books please contact
us, we need to give them back to America.


                          ****     ****





                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               30




                        28 page printout

    Reproducible Electronic Publishing can defeat censorship.

          This file, its printout, or copies of either
          are to be copied and given away, but NOT sold.

          Bank of Wisdom, Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                          ****     ****

Edited by E. Haldeman-Julius

THE BLACK INTERNATIONAL                 No. 16

                   THE HOLY FAITH OF ROMANISTS

                  HOW CATHOLICS ARE HYPNOTIZED
                     ABOUT THEIR WEIRD CREED

                        by Joseph McCabe

                  HALDEMAN-JULIUS PUBLICATIONS
                     GIRARD  -- : --  KANSAS


                          ****     ****

   CHAPTER

     I    What Is the Roman Creed? ............................. 1
@@@
    II    The Pope and Popery .................................. 6

   III    The System of Sacred Magic .......................... 11

    IV    How the Doctrines Were Fabricated ................... 19

     V    How the General Public Is Duped ..................... 24

                          ****     ****

                           Chapter I.

                    WHAT IS THE ROMAN CREED?

     One of my readers informs me that the editor of an important
and comparatively independent American daily to whom he spoke about
the theme of these booklets, the conspiracy of the Black
International with the Axis powers, said that I would create a
sensation if I could furnish adequate evidence of it. He seemed to
think that my work must be on the level of the fools who talk about
a conspiracy against civilization of the Elders of Zion or at the
best a strained inference of plots which from the nature of the
case would be kept strictly secret. The editor did not say that he
would read the ten booklets of the first series in which I gave a
volume of factual evidence and unimpeachable testimony which it
would take a court of law a month to examine; evidence and
testimony from the published words of Popes, prelates, and Catholic
newspapers, leading dailies like the Times and the New York Times,
the European press as objectively reviewed in Keesing's 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               1

                   THE HOLY FAITH OF ROMANISTS

Contemporary Archives, Catholic and pro-Catholic books, and
official statistics. All that was new in my work was that I
laboriously collected these testimonies from the records of the
last ten years -- in our swiftly-moving times even editors forget
what they published a year ago -- and arranged them in such order
as to give the reader a faithful retrospect and an analysis of the
present situation of the world.

     Another correspondent asks me if I have worked up the material
in, or intend to write, one of those three or four-dollar books,
handsomely bound which really inspire confidence in the reader. My
friend is a member of one of those impressive societies of very
serious men and women who are out to tell their contemporaries the
full and profound truth about international happenings from month
to month. It appears that they won't read ten-cent paper-covered
booklets. Their library would not accept a copy of a work which
was, so that any worker could buy it, split up into ten such
booklets. And I reply as in the preceding paragraph. These people
may or may not want to know the truth about the share of the Black
International in the corruption of our age but they would not
publish it in any form or under any circumstance,, and most of them
have a more or less conscious feeling that they would rather not
see anyone give the world truth which they have not the courage to
give.

     Some of these folks privately wish me good-speed in my work.
Some excuse themselves on the score that I am vituperative or a
mere superficial collector of facts; and when one reflects on the
way in which for the last ten years the "polite" writers and the
"profound" writers have led the world blind-fold to the brink of
the pit I welcome this description. But many feel it very difficult
to believe that the Roman Church, which they thought they knew
well, is capable of this conspiracy against civilization: that is
to say, a conspiracy for their own end's, no matter how they define
these, of the leaders of the Church with powers which, if they
succeeded, would certainly wreck civilization as we know it.

     This is not now in dispute but I recommend the reading of a
booklet recently published (though possibly not in America) by
Prof. J. Needham, of Cambridge University, The Nazi Attack on
international Science, in which he shows the appalling corruption
of even men of science in Germany, "Blood and soil," says Prof.
Krieck, Rector of Frankfort University, "are the symbols of the
National-political point of view and the heroic style of life," and
"What is the purpose of university education? . . . the heroic
science of the soldier." But it will be enough to show the depth to
which Prof. P. Lenard, one of the six greatest physical scientists
of our time, has sunk. He has adopted the vile and stupid racialist
creed of the Nazis and repeatedly said that the great Jewish
scientists of Germany (Einstein, etc.) have merely hampered "the
will for truth of the Aryan scholar, which is as boundless as it is
painstaking" and "lowered the level of German science." And what
these men of science, intoxicated by the Nazi poison, say in
Germany is applied to all higher culture and all that is
distinctively modern and promising in our civilization by the
priest-ridden dictators of the dozen countries which now grovel at
the feet of the Pope.


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               2

                   THE HOLY FAITH OF ROMANISTS

     There are two possible theories as to why the leaders of the
Roman Church thus allied themselves with powers that corrupt
culture, suppress a freedom which it took the world a century of
heroic struggle to win, and brought an incalculable misery upon the
race. the first theory, which you may feel to be the natural
interpretation of all the facts that I have given and the whole
history of the Church, is that the Black International sought to
protect the wealth and power it was rapidly losing through the
advance of Socialism. The second theory is that of the Church
itself as stated by the most conscientious of its apologists. You
have the germ of it in these words of Cardinal Newman, the most
respected and most orthodox of Catholic writers in the English
language:

     "The Church holds that it were better for sun and moon to drop
from heaven, for the earth to fail, and for all the many millions
who are upon it to die of starvation in extremist agony, so far as
temporal affliction goes, than that one soul, I will not say should
be lost but should commit one single venial sin, should tell one
wilful untruth, though it harmed no one, or steal one poor farthing
without excuse (Anglican Difficulties, p. 190).

     And if it is Catholic doctrine that it is better that all this
ruin, being only material or secular, should take place than that
you should tell the wife you were detained at the office when you
were giving a little dinner to a stenographer, what ruin is not the
Church prepared to sanction, or to cooperate in producing, rather
than that tens of millions of folk should commit, or should persist
in the mortal sin of apostasy with all its sequels? Every apology
for the Pope's action in Japan, Spain, Germany, Italy, Abyssinia,
Brazil, etc., springs from that root. It is Catholic doctrine from
Augustine's City of God onward.

     Which theory do you prefer? If the first, the Black
International is purely and simply one of the gang, to be arraigned
like the others at the close of the war. If the second, it is an
enemy of the human race and of civilization as we moderns
understand the words. But at least do not talk to me about
respecting sincerity. The head-hunters of Borneo, the thugs of
India, the Aztec priests of Mexico, and the Inquisitors of Spain
were sincere.

     American apologists never quote this perfectly sound doctrinal
statement of Newman. They talk vaguely about it being the business
of the Pope or the Church to look after man's "Spiritual" or
"eternal" interests; and they rub the dust into your eyes by
telling you in the next breath that American civilization is based
upon "spiritual realities." Make no mistake about it. They mean,
when they tell the truth, just what Newman said, for that is the
Catholic faith. Why, then, you ask, do we not hear Protestant
apologists say things of this sort since they also believe in
eternal torment or eternal bliss? You will, as a matter of fact,
sometimes find a fanatical Baptist preacher using equally bleak and
revolting language, though in most Churches the old dogmas have
been softened by modern humanism. But the chief reason is that the
Black International is a professional body which is mainly
concerned to use the logical implications of the creed it imposes
to cover its anti-human activities.

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               3

                   THE HOLY FAITH OF ROMANISTS

     As I said in an earlier book, it is not uncommon to find an
American Catholic writer, even a bishop, loudly asserting, with a
sort of strut and swagger, that if Rome ever ordered them to do or
to believe anything contrary to American principles they would cut
the cable. This, I explained, is a bit of forensic rhetoric or
trickery. It is just to give the non-Catholic public the feeling
that these apologists are so perfectly aware that there is nothing
in Catholicism opposed to our principles that they can even express
themselves in this melodramatic fashion. But it will be a good
introduction to our subject, the real nature of the Catholic as[
distinct from the general Christian creed, to consider what would
happen if these folk were some day called upon to make good their
boast.

     Obviously the Church in America would no longer be either
Roman or Catholic. The loss of the first name may not seem to
matter much because there is already some tendency to drop it. As
I have often pointed out, the new Encyclopedia Americana is
drenched with Catholic influence, yet if you look up "Roman
Catholic Church" you are referred to "Catholic Church, Roman." It
is only a few years since the Black International in Britain made
a brazen attempt to get the history-books in the public schools
revised in their interest, and one change they wanted was to have
the word "Roman" deleted in references to the Catholic Church, and
to get the Pope described as "the head of the Christian religion."
It was rather amusing for those of us who knew that a few years
earlier Catholics (especially in Rome) had boiled over with wrath
because the (Catholic) Premier of Malta had wanted that change made
in the Constitution of the island. However, you easily see what
isolation from Rome would mean to the American Church. The
oleographs of the Pope and St. Peter's in millions of American
(Polish, Italian, etc.) homes must be burned, and try to picture
the turmoil of mind of the folk, old or young, who had listened for
years or decades to services on the august authority of "the Vicar
of Christ," the glories of the Papacy, the unique wisdom of the
Encyclicals, etc., etc. Just bunglers after all. Leave them to
McCabe and Haldeman-Julius.

     The word "Catholic" would, of course, go with the word Roman.
It means, and most essentially implies, "universal." But every
other branch of the Catholic Church would scorn this American
abortion. At Detroit, Canadian Catholics would cross the river to
break up meetings of these foul schismatics of the . . . I wonder
what they would call it. The Church of the Stars and Stripes? The
Neo-American-Medieval Church? I give it up.

     But we know how bold our apologists are, so let us entertain
the idea that some day the hierarchy may bring out bell, book, and
candle against the Pope, and all the Papal marquises and knights
will throw their decorations into the gutter, and so on. What would
be the creed of the new Church, as distinguished from that of the
Protestant Episcopal Church? Study the latest and most careful
statement of the Catholic faith that is offered to the American
public, that written by a Jesuit professor in your Encyclopedia
Americana. Cut away the Papal part and see what is left.
Practically nothing. There is a lot about sacraments (baptism,
confession, communion, ordained priests, etc.) but it seems that 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               4

                   THE HOLY FAITH OF ROMANISTS

the validity of these things depends essentially upon magical
powers inherited from the apostles, to whom Christ gave them,
through Peter and the Popes! These revolting bishops would throw
away the dog and keep only the tail.

     In other words, all this talk about defying the Pope is just
trickery, probably put out with the amiable agreement of the
Vatican. The opportunity to state the creed in the Americana was so
important from the Church angle that you may certainly take the
article as authoritative, and it agrees with all other short and
responsible 'statements, as in the Catholic Encyclopedia. It begins
with the Gospels, which are said to show that Christ was God, and.
that he founded a Church with twelve "apostles" as its cabinet-
ministers and Peter as Premier or President. That is familiar. The
unique Catholic Truth comes in at the next step. It is that if not
a single Gospel had been written we should still know all about it.
Tradition is the great thing, greater than the Gospel's; and, of
course, the Church is the custodian and exponent of Tradition. This
is that wonderful Catholic logic, which is so lacking in modern
science. You prove from the Gospels that God (Christ) founded the
Church and made its leaders infallible, so you have to listen to
it. As to the little weakness that it is a most thorny question
even among Christian scholars how far the Gospel-narrative is
historical, when it was written, what interpolations were made,
etc., the Catholic need not be troubled. The Church, with its
Tradition, which is older than the Gospels, settles all these
things. You prove that John Doe is an authority on economics by the
authority of John Smith, and then you prove the reliability of John
Smith on the authority of John Doe.

     But there is method in the madness. We pass over articles of
the Catholic faith which are common to that Church and the
Fundamentalists. As I showed in the last book, and this, latest
exposition of the creed emphatically repeats, every man who calls
himself a Catholic pledges himself to a belief in the Trinity, the
creation of Adam and Eve and descent of the whole race from them,
the Garden of Eden, the Fall, the inherited or Original Sin, the
Incarnation, the virginity of Mary, the Redemption ("by death on
the cross"), the resurrection, the ascension. Any educated or
liberal Catholic who tells you that the Church does not now require
him to believe all these things literally, or as they were defined
by the Council of Trent, lies. It is the priest who received him
into the Church who whispered that to him -- if he will keep his
mouth closed about it. If any Catholic questions this, let him show
you one line in print of a sermon, book, or Catholic, paper
claiming that liberty.

     After this the creed again becomes distinctively Catholic, and
you see the reason for the above mental gymnastic. Christ's death
created an infinite store of "grace" (supernatural help) for men,
and this is mostly conveyed to them by the seven Sacraments of the
Roman Church. We will consider their peculiarities later. The main
point is that the Church has to prove that these "sacraments," with
all the weird beliefs and elaborate ritual and hierarchy they
entail, were "instituted by Christ." When you contrast the
anti-clerical and anti-ritual message consistently attributed to
Jesus in the Gospels with the powerful hierarchy and rich ritual of


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               5

                   THE HOLY FAITH OF ROMANISTS

the Roman Church you fancy that this will strain the resources of
even the Catholic apologist. Not in the least. It is quite easy.
That is where Tradition comes in. The Gospels are just unofficial
collections of tit-bits. The full message and instructions of Jesus
about the future life of the Church were given privately to the
apostles, and Peter faithfully transmitted them to his successors
in the Roman See. What these Protestant and Rationalist historians
say about the early Church inventing priesthood and dogmas and the
medieval Church inventing myriads of new dogmas and practices which
happened to be rather profitable to it is all nonsense. The Church
invented nothing. It was all there in the instructions whispered to
the Galilean fishermen on the sunny slopes of the hills of Judaea.
When the time for each step was ripe the Church brought out the
plan from the Tradition entrusted to it.

     You begin to see the wonderful simplicity of the Roman Church
-- or of its lay adherents. If you find it difficult to believe
that a Church could get away with this Tradition theory in the
20th, Century read for yourself this article in the Americana. When
at last America was to have its own encyclopedia and not rely on
these Britishers, and the Catholic Church was invited to advertise
itself lavishly in its pages, you may be sure that this chief
article on Catholicism was most carefully considered. It makes a
very strong point of the Tradition theory. Naturally it has to be
helped out by a monstrous amount of tampering with the historical
evidence, but it will be enough to show this in regard to the first
and principal part of the Roman creed: the part which the bishops
propose to discard when that famous day comes on which they will
hurl defiance at the Vatican and the greedy Italians.


                           Chapter II

                       THE POPE AND POPERY

     In a sense its teaching in regard to the Pope is the only
distinctive part of Roman Catholicism. The Greek and certain other
oriental Churches which reject the authority of the Pope -- the
Roman Pope -- agree in almost every other respect with Roman dogma
and ritual, and until 1918 these non-Roman Catholic Churches had
almost as many members as the Roman. Each of them -- Greek,
Russian, Bulgarian, Rumanian, Roman, Syrian, Abyssinian, etc. --
called itself the Catholic (or universal) Church, and they hated
each other like cold poison and snorted at the idea that they were
all sound branches of a really Universal Church, Historically the
Greeks, when Greece was still an Empire, massacred thousands of
followers of the Pope, and the Russians carried on the gentle
tradition on the Poles in the 19th Century. From 1919 to 1939 the
Romanist Poles returned the compliment to the non-Romanist
Russians, and today Italian and Croat Romanists use the familiar
argument on non-Romanist Serbs, or Greeks. Remember that it is
better that, millions should die of starvation, or have their dying
accelerated by a knife or a club, than that one man should commit
a venial sin, much less the mortal and horrible sin of questioning
that Eugenio Pacelli is the Vicar of Christ.




                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               6

                   THE HOLY FAITH OF ROMANISTS

     Each of these oriental Churches was founded by an apostle, or
by a Church which had been founded by an apostle, and -- if for a
moment you will screw your profane mind up to seeing things on this
sacred plane -- it is impossible to think that Christ gave one set
of instructions about the future to Peter and a different set to
his cabinet-ministers. It is therefore essential for the Catholic
apologists to say that in the fast few centuries of the Christian
Era, when the blood of the martyrs kept the Churches fragrant with
virtue -- this is their language, of course, not mine -- and all
were loyal to the message entrusted to the apostles, the supremacy
of the successors of Peter in the bishopric of Rome was
acknowledged; and so all the apologists, not to put too fine a
point on the matter, here lie like blazes. From Ducheane, the
finest and most liberal historical scholar they have had in this
century, to the Jesuit writers in the Catholic Encyclopedia, they
lie.

     Do not ask me to be more polite and to say only, in the words
of a British statesman, that they are guilty of frigid and
calculated inexactitude. Only half a dozen times in the first four
centuries did the Roman Pope claim a jurisdiction outside of Italy.
The evidence is therefore compact and can be studied in two or
three hours by any person who reads Latin; for all the Greek
documents are available in Latin (in the Migne collection). And
this evidence, plainly and emphatically shows that on every such
occasion the other Churches vigorously, and in most cases with
indignation aid contempt, repudiated the claim of the Bishop of
Rome. Yet in the article on the subject in the Catholic
Encyclopedia, one of the chief articles in this work which
announces to the American public that it is the last word in
Catholic scholarship and candor, the Jesuit Joyce says:

     "History bears complete testimony that from the very earliest
times the Roman See has ever claimed the supreme leadership, and
that that leadership has been freely acknowledged by the universal
Church."

     Duchesne himself says in the article on the Papacy in the
Encyclopedia Britannica that its supremacy was "never questioned."
Each of these statements to the public on a point of the highest
importance is therefore the exact reverse of the truth. You can
guess how the minor apologists talk.

     The Catholic professor who writes on the Papacy in the
Encyclopedia Americana is more diplomatic. Perhaps he has seen that
in half a dozen books in the last few years I have reproduced the
evidence -- see especially my True Story of the Roman Catholic
Church (I, 39-43, II 47-57) -- so that even those who do not read
Latin can judge for themselves. But he cannot or dare not tell the
truth. He says: "It is not now maintained that the full
significance of the Petrine primacy was manifest from the first in
the life of Christianity." But that is exactly what the Catholic
Encyclopedia does maintain, as I have quoted. And when this
Catholic professor says that the "full significance" was not
"manifest," instead of saying that it was flatly denied whenever it
was asserted, he is guilty of a constructive untruth. And when he
goes on to say that "Critics of all shades agree that Peter was in 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               7

                   THE HOLY FAITH OF ROMANISTS

Rome in 64" he is as bold as the others. Very few Protestant
theologians and no Rationalist historians admit that Peter was ever
in Rome, and I have shown that the "Letter of the Romans to the
Corinthians" of the year 96 plainly proves the opposite.

     I must not here be drawn into details of history, with which
I have fully dealt, quoting the original Latin and Greek
authorities, elsewhere. For the moment I am concerned only to point
out that the most distinctive doctrine of the Roman Church, that
concerning the Popes, the principal basis of the power of the Black
International, is so demonstrably contrary to the evidence that the
apologists, have to lie to their own people and to the general
public about that evidence. Indeed, the literature they impose upon
their own people -- we are bound to say "Impose" when they forbid
them to read critics -- about this important early phase of their
Church and its Popes is comprehensively untruthful. In the lists of
Popes nearly the whole of the first thirty are marked "Saints and
Martyrs" whereas the facts are so notorious that the leading
Catholic experts admit that not more than two at the most were
martyrs, that the hundreds of stories of martyrs impressed upon
children in Catholic schools are forgeries.

     In the first book of this series I gave a short analysis of
our actual knowledge of the character of the Popes. The character
of the majority of the first eight centuries is really unknown to
us, but many were rogues. It is significant that there are only two
periods in the first three centuries when contemporary documents
throw a light upon the character of the Popes and they (Victor,
Callistus, and Damasus) are seen to be very far from saintly. But
I need not repeat the facts even in summary. When catholics are
told by their priests that their Church has been ruled by a long
line of Holy Fathers, Vicars of Christ, except that for mysterious
reasons God permitted "a few bad Popes" in the series, they are
duped. The phrase "a few bad Popes," 'which occurs in all Catholic
writers, is a constructive untruth. The Papacy was corrupt for
whole centuries: especially from about 880 to 1050 and (with a
short decent pontificate at rare intervals) 1290 to about 1660. No
"primacy" in any other organized religion has so disgraceful a
record. If I have any readers of this who are not familiar with my
earlier work I may assure them that I have covered the entire
ground in those works and quoted the contemporary documents for
each age, Some day I will get out a biographical catalogue of the
Popes. The general public is today more grossly deceived than ever
about the facts of Catholic history.

These facts are materially relevant to my present subject. The man
who hesitates to admit that the supreme motive of the Black
International is the protection and increase of its power and
wealth, who is inclined to take the "spiritual" view of its
activity therefore fails to understand that activity until it is
too late, only to consult the historical facts. I have said that
the longest period of degradation of the "Holy See," a period to
which you will find no parallel in the history of the religions
which Rome treats with such contempt, was from about 1290 to 1660.
The Papal Court was almost uniformly and extraordinarily corrupt
during that stretch, and the great majority of the Popes were men
themselves of unworthy character or men who permitted or patronized
corruption. That applies to nine-tenths of this period of nearly
four centuries.
                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               8

                   THE HOLY FAITH OF ROMANISTS

     Yet this is just the period when the fires of the Inquisition
burned most fiercely. The spectacle of the deeply religious and
puritanical monk Savonarola butchered as a heretic at Florence
under a Pope, Alexander VI, of the most cynically immoral life is
not a bad symbol for the period. More cynical still in some
respects, as he turned to sodomy after he became Pope, was Leo X,
and this man. wanted Luther burned at the stake as John Hus had
been burned under that "monster of vice" (as the Council which
tried him called him), John XXIII. Yet in those days the cry of the
Black International was the same as now. They were, they said,
moved only by thought of the horrible danger to the faithful of
eternal damnation, and no bodily suffering of individual or of
nation need be taken into account in their zeal to protect souls.

     It is one of the paradoxes of modern times that the larger our
historical knowledge has grown or the more self-conscious the world
at large has become, the more the power of the Pope has grown. No
Catholic writer would now dare, or be disposed, tell the facts
about the Popes of the Middle Ages as candidly as did Cardinal
Baronius, the Father of Catholic History, the pride of the Roman
Church in the 16th Century. A Cardinal Richelieu honestly telling
the Vatican, not making an insincere brag about it to impress his
own countrymen, that if the Pope does not mind his own business he
will sever France from Rome is today unthinkable. Instead of a
"Gallican Movement," which for centuries checked the Popes and
their encroachments in France, we have a French hierarchy cringing
to Rome though it is the ally of the brutes who drench France with
shame and misery. All the Catholic anti-Papal attitudes (Febronian,
etc.) of national Churches are deader, if I may use the expression,
than astrology. Such a figure as Lord Acton, the last fine scholar
of the Church, is no longer possible in it. There is far more
deliberate untruth in Catholic literature, particularly in regard
to the Popes, than there ever was before. And the literary men and
sociologists who write so much and so brilliantly about the
paradoxes and weaknesses of our age never notice this paradox.

     The historian of the future will write delicious pages on it.
The fundamental reason for this growth in modern times of what is
properly called Popery -- not the growth of Romanism in the world,
for there is no such growth, but of the cult of the Pope in the
Catholic Church -- is just that spread of democracy which Rome
hates so much. The Pope is the figure-head of the Italian
hierarchy, which shares the vast wealth and prestige that the new
Popery brings to Rome. Italy itself is too poor to give a
comfortable living to the preposterous number of its bishops and
priests, but Rome as the international center of the Church always
redeemed the poverty of Italy, as far as the clergy are concerned,
and this new glorification of the Pope everywhere, this blind
adulation of his encyclicals and speeches, this pressure on the
world-press to exalt him, have made it more profitable than ever;
and the Black International in every country shares the prestige
and prosperity and the new protection against the formidable forces
which threatened the very existence of the Church.

     The root of this remarkable development is, as I said, the
growth of democracy. A million Catholics means a quarter or half a
million votes, according to the nature of the franchise, and a 
political party has a profound respect for a man who can control 

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               9

                   THE HOLY FAITH OF ROMANISTS

even quarter of a million votes, not to speak of five or six
millions. I am for the moment considering the world as it was
before the convulsions of the last three years, though we have seen
how the Vatican extracted profit from those. The Black
International in each country needed no orders from Rome. They and
the junta of Italians who run the Vatican had a common interest. It
was to the profit of all that statesmen should begin to consult and
editors to flatter "His Holiness." Catholic papers, knowing well
what it all meant -- Catholic support for politicians or papers --
put into their mouths an elegant pretext: they were supposed to
have rise superior to the narrow and poisonous prejudice against
the Popes of the last century and inaugurated an era of real
liberalism, tolerance, and civic cooperation.

     All this reacted on the Catholic body itself and led to a
meeker submission to or exaggeration of the powers of the Pope than
ever before. Universal free education and the creation of a
Catholic press greatly aided the clergy. Every encyclical that
issued from Rome was hailed in Catholic papers and, under Catholic
pressure, in other papers as a document of marvelous wisdom. As I
have had occasion to point out in various books, Catholic
literature still dilates in superlative language on encyclicals of
Leo XIII that were either actually reactionary or at the best
contained a few outward platitudes of humanitarian Liberalism which
were nicely trimmed so that no Catholic capitalist could take
serious, exception to them. Simple-minded Catholics expected the
Pope to be asked to preside at the Versailles Conference and are
today expecting President Roosevelt to secure that he will be
invited to preside at the Peace Conference when the present war is
over. Their Church in America published the fact that with a
prodigious expenditure of money and outpour of literature and
oratory it "converts" only about 25,000 of the 120,000,000
Americans every year; and it is demonstrable that it loses ten
times that number every year. Yet you will find numbers of Catholic
papers and books declaring that the conversion of the whole of
America to this child-like allegiance to the Pope is just round the
corner -- as prosperity was in Hoover's day.

     This second quarter of the 20th Century will be characterized
by social writers of the future as the age of negroid music,
tabloid newspapers, and cosmetics. In such an age any sufficiently
enterprising body can do almost anything. And the Black
International, with an army distributed over the earth of certainly
more than a million agents (priests, monks, nuns, teachers,
journalists, etc.) is an enterprising body. Even in England, where
Catholics are about one-twenty-fifth of the population, it had the
insolence a few years ago to approach the educational authorities
of the London County Council and demand a revision -- in reality,
of course, a falsification -- of the historical manuals used in the
schools of its vast area; and these manuals are already as tame as
a toothless old dog. It transpired that when, with the help of
benevolent Labor majorities, they had captured the schools of
London, they hoped to capture those of the whole country. Why not,
they asked? They had, they said, already done this in some of the
leading cities of America. And the Pope whom they expected to
glorify, knowing that they would shine in the reflection of his
glory, was one of the men responsible for the horrible evil which 
came within measurable distance of wrecking the, British Empire,
reducing Britain to the status of a fourth-rate power.
                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               10

                   THE HOLY FAITH OF ROMANISTS

                           Chapter III

                   THE SYSTEM OF SACRED MAGIC

     This Popery of the Roman Church is enough in itself to prevent
it from ever cooperating heartily in American life. As far as I can
discover no one has pointed out that these theologians (Suarez,
etc.) who four centuries ago spoke about the rights of the people
and the Popes who, after ignoring their political ethics for four
hundred years and defending the divine right of kings, now find it
expedient to recall it in their encyclicals never say what
Americans think and say. No one has ever been able to quote, or
ever will be able to quote, any endorsement by the Popes of the
people's right to govern themselves. All that they have ever said
is that the people have a right to nominate the man, king or
president, to whom God will give the authority to govern them. Such
words as "rule" and "govern" are in fact, obsolete to the modern
mind. Within strict limits the majority which votes a "government"
into "power" has the right to cheek the activity of individuals
whose acts are prejudicial to the general good. But it is, as in
the case of crime, a matter of organized administration not
governing.

     Thus, while the essential feature of democracy, as we
understand it, is freedom, the operative word in this revived
Catholic political ethic is "authority." It dropped from the lips
of Popes more and more frequently when there seemed to be a
prospect of Nazism conquering the world. Petain dribbles it in
Vichy every week. Franco, Salazar, Vargas, and the whole brood of
puppet dictators under clerical guidance agree that the cause of
the world's malady is the decay of authority and the remedy is the
restoration of authority. A few days before I wrote this the
German-inspired Swiss and Swedish press said that Hitler was going
to make a sensational announcement "and that this would be a
declaration that the Catholic League (Spain, France, Portugal,
etc.) had agreed to adhere formally to the Axis. The sensational
announcement proved to be a pitiful exhibition of carpet-chewing,
but the contemptible Catholic dictators continue to mumble about
authority. We know what they mean by authority: abject submission
to rulers in the choice of whom the people have no share, or the
exact opposite of the American Constitution.

     This is the fundamental principle of the Papal Constitution,
and it is all the more repugnant to the modern mind when we
contrast the story of its actual historical development with the
Catholic theory of it. The idea that Jesus took Peter and his
friends aside and instructed them how they and their successors
during centuries were to build up and equip the Church is a very
feeble sort of fairy-tale. That such an idea should be offered to
the American public in what purports to be its most up-to-date and
most important work of reference shows only to what an extent the
Church has already put a blight upon American culture. I suppose
this new encyclopedia is in the historical school of all American
universities, and I wonder if any professor dare warn his pupils
that, not only is the idea in itself too absurd to be put before an
adult person, not only is Jesus described in the oldest portion of



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               11

                   THE HOLY FAITH OF ROMANISTS

 the earliest Gospel as convinced that the world would come to an
end within fifty years, but that the historical influence and
conditions which explain the evolution of the Papal power are as
fully known as the causes of the feudal system or the Renaissance.

     We will glance at these in the next chapter. Let us first
consider the next distinctive element of the Catholic scheme. To
the man in the street it probably seems that there is a gulf
between the Catholic and the Protestant Church, but my readers know
differently. Practically all branches of the Christian Church east
of a line from Northern Yugo-Slavia to the Russian frontier of
Poland agree entirely with the Romanists except that they scorn the
Pope, allow married men to become priests, and differ on one
insignificant detail of the doctrine of the Trinity. Then there is
the "Catholic" wing of the Church of England and the Protestant
Episcopal Church of America. In any case, you can simplify the
apparently bewildering Romanist system by dividing it into two
parts. There is the doctrine of the authority of priests and
hierarchies with all its disciplinary consequences, and there is
the doctrine of "grace" which is the basis of the whole scheme of
ritual and dependence on the priests.

     I am afraid my readers are a very profane lot, and I almost
despair of explaining to them what this "grace" means. I might make
short work of the job and say that it is just supernatural magic
and the priest is the magician, but, your Catholic friends would
not admit that. It is fundamental to the whole Catholic system, yet
all these pro-Catholic writers and journalists fight shy of it as
nervously as they do of the chastity of a nun. The nearest thing to
it in the world of reality is mana. The Melanesians, who are almost
at the lowest section of savage life, believe that a mysterious
power pervades nature and is especially stored in certain persons
and objects. Every native is on the lookout for more mana, which
means more strength, bravery, defiance of evil spirits. He looks
for unusual objects -- shells, stones, etc. -- in nature or eats
dead men who had been strong and bold. It is fairly equivalent to
the medieval idea of magical power, and it is analogous in a sense
to that supernatural influence or "grace" which Catholics are so
keen to get.

     Do not ask me to go into the psychology of it. Catholic
doctrines, and especially this basic doctrine, can no more be
fitted to modern psychology than the grass-skirt of some fat old
Maori woman could be fitted on a slim blond stenographer. Catholic
theology still talks about man's "free will" as the basis of moral
judgment. Most of my readers will know that no modern psychologist
even notices the antiquated belief in free will, and four manuals
out of five say that there is no such thing as will. But even if
there were, the cooperation of this "grace" with it would be as
mysterious as the Trinity. However, there it is. Since the Fall of
man the human will has been so enfeebled in the face of temptation
that it needs this magical strengthening or grace. Is a girl going
to a dance? Has a youth to sit in an office with wicked non-
Catholic youths? Does a man's business afford illicit
opportunities? And so on. You remember how we saw that the Catholic
is assured that the rest of us are so fearfully wicked that every 



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               12

                   THE HOLY FAITH OF ROMANISTS

hour he is in more danger -- because the penalty of yielding is
eternal -- than if he were in a Florida swamp or a smallpox area of
a Mexican town. Grace is what he needs: the great evil-tonic with
magical qualities.

     The next step is that the Roman Church has an unlimited Supply
on tap, and other Churches have none or a very poor and uncertain
supply. You may find this exposition rather tedious but on
reflection you will admit that you now begin to see why the
Catholic talks about his unique church, outside which salvation is
at least so risky that no Insurance Corporation in Chicago would
take it on. This grace has to be conveyed by "channels" for some
reason or other (doubtless on those secret instructions given to
Peter in his fisherman's cottage), and the main channels are the
Seven Sacraments: Baptism, Penance (Confession and Absolution)
Confirmation, the eucharist, Holy Orders, Marriage, and Extreme
Unction. And by what you may or may not choose to regard as a
remarkable coincidence each of these channels is controlled and
opened by a priest. You may, of course, get grace by praying for
it, as the devil does not always give you fair warning to get
official assistance. You may see a man drop a five-spot on the
pavement before you, the sun shining through a girl's translucent
skirt, an unexpectedly bold picture at the cinema, one of McCabe's
books lying about . . . Then pray for grace. But the surest and
broadest of all channels are the confessional and that priceless
advantage of Catholics, the "real presence" of Christ, in the
consecrated wafer and the various rites (communion, the mass, etc.)
based upon it.

     These two threads will take you through almost the entire
labyrinth of the Catholic scheme of services and practices for
defeating those deadly, restless, voracious, and intensely spiteful
enemies of yours: the world, the flesh, and the devil. I am not
going through the labyrinth with you. I have a touch of lumbago
just now, and my sense of humor is under eclipse. But I must say a
few words on each "sacrament", for there are writers who may try to
persuade you that they are just pretty symbolic arches under which
the happy Catholic passes as he hurries from the cradle to the
grave. baptism in infancy, confession at the age of seven (when you
first become liable for hell), communion at nine or so,
confirmation at thirteen or fourteen when the springtide of the
hormones rises, marriage or holy orders when the contest becomes
tougher, extreme unction in the last lap.

     There is nothing symbolic about baptism. It is stern Catholic
dogma -- and if any man professes to be a Catholic, and does not
admit it he is not honest for he dare not openly say so -- that
every human being inherits the eternal punishment imposed for the
sin of Adam and Eve, and baptism is the one cleansing fluid for
this liability. In the early Church baptism was generally
administered late in life, and the idea of all children, if not
half the Christian body, to say nothing of the pagan millions,
being sent to hell for all eternity was so revolting to the few
educated pagans who took any interest, in the new religion that a
compromise was effected. Eternal torture, as I explained in the
last book, has two aspects: the loss of the vision of God and
"sensory pain." So theologians worked out -- I mean found amongst 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               13

                   THE HOLY FAITH OF ROMANISTS

the blue-prints entrusted to Peter in Galilee -- that besides hell
and heaven there is Limbo or Purgatory, a spirit-world with a
salubrious temperature and what-ever sports and entertainment
spirits indulge in, but no vision of God . . .

     I had better keep off these more delicate aspects of the
Catholic faith, as this pen of mine runs to ribaldry. It is enough
that not one of us, from the new-born babe to the centenarian, will
go to heaven unless he has been baptized. In America apologists
dupe the general public by saying that it is no longer Catholic
doctrine that "outside the Church there is no salvation." I have
shown that this is false if by salvation is meant admission to
heaven, but theologians are good enough to allow that baptism in
Protestant Churches may be valid. There are, however, so many
conditions for validity that it is always doubtful, and a convert
to the Roman Church is always "conditionally" baptized.

     Doubtless all this sounds very silly, if not a little
nauseating, to most of my readers, but it is an essential part of
the theory to which the Black International appeals to justify its
intrigues, its encroachments on the liberties of non-Catholics, and
its endorsement of such policies as the alliance with the Axis
powers. By the "spiritual interests" which, the apologist says, the
Church must consider above all other matters, he means something
totally different from what a religious statesman or a puritanical
essayist means when he uses that expression. He is referring to
this monstrous doctrine of eternal punishment and the claim of the
Roman Church to possess the only really safe means of dodging it.

     At seven the normal child is introduced to the sacrament of
Penance. The basis of this practice again is revolting. It is that
a child usually reaches "the age of reason" at that age and may
incur eternal damnation. They are all treated as junior Dead-End
Kids. The child is confronted with a list of the more serious sins
-- I regret that I do not remember from 67 years ago whether it
contained fornication, adultery, etc., as it does in the Prayer
Book which older children consult -- which it may have committed up
to the age of seven. Less serious sins (lies, quarrels, petty
thefts, etc.) a Catholic is not bound to confess as the penalty is
not hell. I have not patience to discuss it, but when you read one
of those books in which it is said that the Catholic Church has,
from its long experience, a marvelous understanding of and sympathy
with human nature, think of these boys and girls of seven to ten
being taught to brood over their sins and hell and the devil.

     So begins the life-long comedy of the confessional. From the
age of seven to death the Catholic must go to confession at least
once a year, and the societies and confraternities which most of
them are bullied into joining make the obligation monthly. It is
rather surprising that the Church does not make it weekly. It must
harrow a priest's feelings to think of his men and women, youths
and maids, boys and girls over the age of seven, frivoling about
the parish or the city for three weeks or so under the sentence of
so savage a punishment that the practices of the Nazis in Poland
and Russia or of the Japs in China are pleasantries in comparison.
Is it necessary again to remind you that this is indispensable
Catholic belief on which no gloss whatever in permitted?


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               14

                   THE HOLY FAITH OF ROMANISTS

     The moral aspect I have considered in an earlier book. To talk
about the rare cases in which a woman of severe character goes to
the priest for "spiritual advice" is like saying that war is a fine
moral tonic because a few are braced or purified by their
sufferings. Let us keep to plain English. The crowd you will see on
any Saturday night in a Catholic Church awaiting their turn to
confess is enough to make you despair of modern intelligence in the
mass. There are social moralists who shed tears over the crowds at
baseball games or in cinemas. They would do better to be concerned
about the intellectual level betrayed in these scenes in Catholic
churches. Remember that I was once a father-confessor. They just
reel off mechanically a list of lies, quarrels, thefts, drinking,
etc. and in almost every case a few points about sex; for the
Church tells them that not merely every act of touch or exhibition
but every thought or word about sex comes under the damnation
clause. And for every woman or girl who sincerely wants guidance
there are fifty who just love the intimate talk about sex that is
permitted with the priest in the confessional; and, to crown the
infamy, there is not a more transparently priest-made doctrine in
the whole of religion than this sacrament of penance. That it
promotes morals and reduces crime is bunk. The one object of it is
to consolidate the power of the priest over the laity.

     I pass over the sacrament of confirmation, which is as idle a
ceremony as taking the oath when you are elected to Congress, and
the next sacrament, the Eucharist, the chief glory and pride of the
Church, is intellectually quite the most repellent of the lot.
"Eating the God" -- that is to say, eating food in which the God is
believed to be present so that some mysterious power or influence
(grace) passes to the eaten -- is so natural a stage in the
development of ritual religion that the Spanish missionaries who
came out to convert the Aztecs found that they had that ceremony in
a form that was weirdly like their own. It was common in Greece --
in the cult of Ceres (the spirit of the corn) and Bacchus (the
spirit of the vine) -- and was found in the Persian and Mithralc,
and Manichaean religions. Thus a sacred supper of bread and wine
was very well known in all those cities of the Mediterranean coast
in which Christianity arose. In the great rivals of Christianity
during the first three centuries of its life, Mithraism and
Manicheanism, the similarity to the Christian practice was so close
that one Father of the Church was inspired with the theory that the
devil had tried to spoil the Church's game by anticipating it, and
Augustine tried to discredit the Manichaean sacrament by assuring
his followers that the Manichaean priests made their wafer from a
fluid and in a manner even the vaguest description of which would,
if I gave it here, secure a year's rest in a Penitentiary for
Haldeman-Julius; and Augustine was an ex-Manichaean!

     Whether thing common practice of "communion" had anything to
do with the appearance of the "last supper" story of the Gospels we
cannot consider here, nor can we linger to trace how the
"eucharist" grew out of this. But the fully developed dogma is so
starkly incredible that, although there is no obscurity whatever
about the statement of it I have often described it, I wonder if
any non-Catholic reader fully realizes what the Catholic believes
and would be expelled from the Church if he did not quite literally
believe. The "bread" used in the sacrament is, as most people know,


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               15

                   THE HOLY FAITH OF ROMANISTS

a thin round wafer or cracker made from flour and water: the wine,
as a rule, a light Rhenish wine mixed with water. And the dogma is
that when, in the mass, the priest breathes over these the Latin
for "This is my body" (Hoc est corpus meum, which the wicked
Reformers shortened to Hocus-pocus) and "This is my blood," they
are in the most literal sense converted into the living personality
(body, mind, and divinity) of Jesus Christ. Theologians take
advantage of a fanciful distinction, which Aristotle made -- it is,
of course, quite meaningless in modern science -- between the
"substance" of a thing and its "accidents." In the case of a wafer
or a glass of wine these "accidents" are the color, shape, weight,
taste, etc. The Catholic dogma is that in every Catholic chapel
every morning there is the prodigious miracle, at the priest's
words, of the living personality of Christ taking the place of the
substance (by transubstantiation) of the bread and wine while the
"accidents" (or qualities, if you like) of the bread and wine
remain!

     Of course, you say, educated Catholics do not believe this .
. . (supply your own expletive). If any educated Catholic does not
literally believe it he dare not say so except in private
conversation with some other person who thinks it honest to profess
to be a Catholic and to deny a dogma on which the Church insists as
sternly as it insists on the existence of God. Every proposal to
give it a figurative or symbolical interpretation has been
condemned as heresy, a mortal sin to hold even in your own mind, a
sure ticket to Gehenna. But you have not yet heard the half of it.

     As the "accidents" of the wafer and the wine can be divided
into crumbs or drops, the theologian has to say that the living
body of Christ is in each crumb or drop: the entire physical body,
with heart beating, lungs working, blood flowing -- from hair to
toe-nails. Ask any Catholic if you still believe that I am pulling
your leg. Count Hoensbroech, the German ex-Jesuit, tells us from
his personal experience of a woman who after receiving the
sacrament (consecrated wafer) in communion reflected that she had
Christ's organs in her mouth, and she spat it into her handkerchief
and brought it to him. I advise you to get that point clearly. It
is heresy and a moral sin in Catholic theology to say even in your
own mind, as Protestants say in regard to their Lord's Supper, that
there is just a special presence or influence of God in the
consecrated elements. The doctrine of the Real Presence of which
Catholic (domestic) literature talks so much, means that Christ's
physical living body -- you remember that it "ascended" alive into
heaven -- is present in every crumb of the consecrated wafer -- if
one is badly made and a crumb falls off Christ is in it -- and
every drop of the consecrated wine.

     By this time some of my readers will be saying: Oh, quit it
and pass on to something that we can at least read. But if you want
to understand the Catholic's pride in his unique faith and
especially his belief that cruelty, intrigue, and mendacity are
justified in the work of bringing the world to so beautiful and
salutary a faith, you had better hear the whole of it.





                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               16

                   THE HOLY FAITH OF ROMANISTS

     There are, I take it -- I won't stop to work it out -- quarter
of a million altars at which this miracle occurs every morning, 
with Christ in each crumb. But besides the larger wafer which the
priest swallows -- often with much effort, for I can assure you
that those "accidents" of the bread remain pretty tough in a dry
throat -- he occasionally "consecrates" hundreds of smaller wafers
in a separate vessel for the laity to receive in what is called
communion. These are stored in that highly decorated safe which you
will find in the center of every Catholic altar. That is why a lamp
burns before it and the Catholic bends his knee on entering or
raises his hat on passing a church. If a bedridden invalid wants to
communicate in his home, the priest takes a wafer in a silver box
in his vest pocket. In Catholic countries, where there are no
ribald scoffers a procession warns Catholic wayfarers, who fall on
their knees, and even in America the priest wears a half-hidden
"stole" on such occasions so that the first parishioner he meets
will not stop him to tell the latest funny story or offer him a
cigarette. Did it ever occur to you that many a time when you met
a black-clad priest round Fourth Avenue he had Jesus Christ in his
vest pocket?

     If you like large sums in arithmetic you may care to estimate
in round numbers in how many crumbs of how many wafers (allow, say,
a hundred wafers to each church) in how many churches throughout
the world Jesus Christ is physically present without leaving
heaven: I haven't time. You may wonder also what happens when a
burglar opens the safe (tabernacle) for the silver cups and
scatters the consecrated wafers ( ... hosts") on the street, or a
bomb buries it until the "accidents" putrefy -- all theologians
admit that they will -- and so on. All that is carefully worked out
in theology and was doubtless included in the blue-prints entrusted
to Peter. It is disputed whether Christ remains when these wicked
Satanists, who are as real to Catholics as vampires are to a Bulgar
peasant, steal a "host" for very naughty purposes. It is generally
held that he does, and there are lots of edifying stories in
circulation in the Church about how the blood spurted from the host
when the wicked Freemason or Satanist stuck a dagger in it. A
church in America can hardly prosecute a man for stealing Christ,
but theft is not necessary. Every apostate priest, even Joseph
McCabe, retains the power to work this transubstantiation. I must
say that no Satanists have ever offered me a dime for my services.

     I could fill a book with interesting features of this dogma
and of the practices which it inspires, but must confine myself to
one more. This belief is the care of the Catholic Sunday just as it
is the central and most tremendous and precious dogma of the whole
system. In the "mass" on the Sunday morning the priest consecrates
the "host" and under pain of hell every Catholic who is not
seriously ill (tiredness or a cold or toothache won't do) must be
present at least at one of the "low masses (without singing). The
priest does his best for the people, gabbing his addresses and
prayers, in Latin, to the Almighty at 200 to 300 words a minute, so
as to get through in 25 minutes, or there will be much grumbling.
The "high" mass is the same ceremony with singing, commonly a choir
of non-Catholic professionals who happily, do not understand in the
least what is going on, and the best music (Beethoven, Mozart,
Cherabini, etc.) has been written by skeptics and apostates, as I 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               17

                   THE HOLY FAITH OF ROMANISTS

will tell in a later book. The evening service is optional to
Catholics, but again the chief part of it is based upon this dogma.
A consecrated wafer in a silver-gilt and glass receptacle, is
exhibited amidst a blaze of candles and flowers for the adoration
'Of the people. This doctrine of the eucharist, in other words, is
the chief source of the priest prestige -- he alone can create and
handle "the Blessed Sacrament" -- and the possession of so unique
and priceless a thing puts the Catholic faith incomparably higher
than any other religion.

     After this I need not waste time on the other sacraments and
all the devices piously supplied by the Church for a small
consideration, for defeating this desperate conspiracy of the world
(you and me), the flesh, the devil against the souls of Catholics.
Matrimony is a peculiar sacrament -- No, not on the ground that you
think I mean but because, on theological principles, the parties
administer it to themselves by marrying. But you may be sure the
priest is not out of it. As I have shown in an earlier booklet it
is part of Rome's sheer defiance of civil law in any modern
civilization that it declares the marriage invalid if the priest is
not present and valid if he is although the ceremony is (contrary
to civil law) kept secret. The real reason why in this case the
priest is not said to be the minister of the sacrament is, because
any Catholic can find out that until the 12th Century a Catholic
did not need to be married by a priest.

     "Holy Orders" is the channel by which a very special "grace"
-- the power of transubstantiate bread, to absolute sins, and to
sustain a vow of chastity so heroically as priests do -- is
conveyed. Extreme Unction, or the Last Anointing, is a development
of a pre-Christian medical practice of rubbing with oil, men who
were very ill. It became a symbolical ceremony of touching with oil
the parts of the body with which a man or woman had sinned. It was,
however, apparently provided in the original blue-prints that when
our wicked age supervened the anointing of "the loins" might be
omitted. In the delicate and virtuous Middle Ages they just lifted
up the dying person's smock and -- Well, it is not clear in the
ritual books what exactly the priest anointed. Holy Water is not a
sacrament but is very valuable. It is water from which a priest
has, with a pinch of salt -- I was never clear whether or not this
was meant for the devil's tail -- and various incantations driven
out the devil, and he so dreads it ever after that the Catholic
makes lavish use of it in church; where, Catholic practice suggests
-- women Still wear their hats to keep the devil from entering by
their ears -- evil spirits are strangely numerous. Then there are
the numerous objects (medals, etc.) blessed by the priest, the
bishop, or the Pope to be worn next the skin. These are the
cheapest of all means of fighting the world, the flesh, and the
devil and getting,one's "time" in purgatory reduced. But these
simple reflections on the main features of the Catholic system must
suffice.








                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               18

                   THE HOLY FAITH OF ROMANISTS

                           Chapter IV

                HOW THE DOCTRINES WERE FABRICATED

     That very persuasive and very popular and magnificently
audacious 'American apologist Dr. Fulton Sheen published a work
entitled Old Errors and New Labels (1931). It is as boring and as
far from reality as Hilaire Belloc on the same theme (Arrivals and
New Arrivals). The burden of the first chapter is a complaint -- a
complaint, mind you -- that nobody ever attacks his Church today.
It has "never before in the whole history of Christianity been so
intellectually impoverished for want of good sound intellectual
opposition" (p. 7). Phew! I will not attempt to reply that I have
myself written about 100 books and booklets (besides the present
series) on the Roman Church and never seen a word of reply,
because, of course, I am not at all on the same intellectual level
as Fulton Sheen. He would at once tell you that. So would I. What
he means is, he says, that the apologist wants "a foeman worthy of
his steel" -- like Hitler looking round Europe for little men until
he stupidly attacked Russia. The Church, he says, "asks her
children to think hard and think clean," and a really powerful
opposition helps this. But the intellectuals of America are afraid
to venture upon criticism. And so on.

     That is the sort of stuff that Catholics read. It does not
occur to them that they are forbidden to read critics anyway, or
that to explain the "intellectual impoverishment" of their
literature in his fashion is much like a junior baseball team
saying that it is kept down because the Giants won't meet it. The
reverend sophist also sublimely ignores the fact that his Church in
America has a tremendous organization for preventing the
publication or circulation of any criticism of itself and trying to
bring economic ruin upon any professor or professional writer who
dare attempt it.

     But we might overlook all that. What will at once occur to the
reader, after the preceding chapter, is the question: How in heck
does a Catholic expect modern scientists, philosophers, or
historian's to sit down and write serious criticisms of that
bewildering tissue of puerilities and dupery? Even the modern
astrologer or palmist puts up a better show. If Dr. Sheen literally
Believes that stuff, as he certainly professes to do, he might as
well expect Mencken to criticize the kiddies's section of the
Sunday Supplement, or a Carnegie Foundation to issue a learned
treatise on the longevity of the patriarchs. To talk about the
intellectual impoverishment of his Church is superfluous, but for
a man who accepts all this medieval trash to turn round on our age
with its monumental intellectual and practical achievements and
tell us that we are "Spineless" and "afraid of truth" is too funny
to be a good joke.

     I have written this lengthy chapter on what the Fulton Sheens
and Ryins and J.J. Walshes believe not because it is stuff that is
worthy of the reader's consideration but because he ought to know
exactly what Popes and apologists mean when they say that those
"higher interests" of men which they have to consult justify them
in ignoring those "lower interests" (peace., prosperity, freedom, 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               19

                   THE HOLY FAITH OF ROMANISTS

etc.) which we moderns think paramount. Now you know just what they
mean. But the cream of this very bad joke is that these doctrines
and practices which they are going to fasten upon more millions of
men at the cost of appalling war and suffering were quite
transparently and, in the world of scholarship, notoriously
fabricated by the Black International itself.

     I have shown this in chapter II as regards the first
distinctive leading Catholic doctrine, the power and peculiar
inspiration of the Pope. In the first reliable Roman document,
which was written by the Roman Christians themselves in the year
96, their bishops is not mentioned. He is just one of the bunch. A
hundred years later his successor claims authority over communities
in Asia Minor, and the bishops "bitterly reproached Victor" (the
Pope) for his insolence, the first ecclesiastical historian, Bishop
Eusebius, tells us (v. 24) and the African Fathers joined in and
heavily castigated him. In short, as I said, though the claim of
authority began to be treasured in Rome itself after A.D. 150 --
the blue-print given to Peter on this point seems to have been lost
for a century and a half, and all copies in the case were lost --
Popes ventured to assert it only five or six times in four
centuries and were mercilessly snubbed every time. Their
opportunity came in the 5th Century when the Goths and Vandals
wrecked the Empire and left no bishop of any strength to oppose
Rome, and Europe sank to an abysmal ignorance. The Greek Churches,
though on Catholic theory they had the same instructions or
tradition as Rome, continued to tell the Pope what he could do with
his claims, and even in the Darkest Europe of the Dark Age it took
the Popes eight further centuries -- culminating in the monstrous
claims of Innocent in (1198-1216) -- to build up that power which,
the world is solemnly informed in the 20th Century -- it would have
laughed even in the 10th -- Christ prescribed to the apostles. And
this power was, Catholic historians admit, in large part based upon
a mass of forgeries, the False Decretals, that are still basic
documents of the Canon Law.

     Reflect again on the fact, which I proved, that the Catholics
of our time are more subservient to the Pope than Catholics ever
were before. The Popes had to wait until 1870 to get themselves
declared infallible, as they had always claimed to be, and they had
a deuce of a time in getting the bishops to declare it. A
Republican or Democratic Convention for nominating a candidate for
the presidency has nothing on the Vatican Council of 1870. Catholic
schools had exposed in the 15th Century the lies on which the
claims of jurisdiction and the temporal power of the Popes were
based. Catholic France loudly defied the Pope even in the time of
Louis XIV. Now American and British bishops laud his serene wisdom
and divine majesty even while he is, they know, conspiring with the
bitter enemies of their countries and of civilization. Do you want
further proof of the common interest of the Black International and
of the fact that that interest is economic?

     Not less demonstrable is the fabrication of those dogmas and
practices which, the apologists blandly say, Christ sketched to the
apostles. (Incidentally, what an encyclopedia these illiterate
fishermen must have compiled?) The "eucharist," of course, is
ancient enough. As I explained, a sacred supper of bread and wine 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               20

                   THE HOLY FAITH OF ROMANISTS

in which a god was somehow incorporated was one of the chief
features of the leading religions of the Greek-Roman world, as the
Fathers admit. The pagans taunted them with having borrowed it. But
what exactly it meant to Christians in the first and second
centuries we do not know, and how it became "the mass" (borrowing
the very word from the Mithraists, according to many) in the 3rd
Century, and how the doctrine of transubstantiation was slowly
elaborated we cannot consider here. It was that towering genius
Thomas Aquinas who fully worked out the theory of the "accidents"
(color, shape, weight, smell, liability to putrefy or intoxicate,
etc.) of the bread and wine remaining when the "Substance"
disappeared.

     The sacraments of penance (confession) and matrimony, which
are the richest sources of the power of the priests over the laity,
are, on the other hand, quite obvious and late bits of priestcraft.
A practice of voluntarily confessing sins was, as I have previously
said, inherited from the pre-Christian world, but it was not until
after the year 200 that the Roman Church, under a Pope of
disreputable character (Callistus), discovered that the power to
bind and loose, which Christ was supposed to have given to the
apostles (Matt. XVI:19), meant that the bishop could absolve from
grave sing that were confessed to him, and other Churches
pronounced this a scandalous misinterpretation of the Scriptures in
the interest of the Roman clergy. Again the apostolic blue-prints
seem to have been lost. In the Darn Age, naturally the clergy made
headway with their ambition to enslave the laity -- even Havelock
Ellis and Bloch do not seem to have read the lists of sins that
survive from that appalling age -- but it still took centuries to
get obligatory confession extended to the clergy, monks, and nuns.
The laity remained refractory until the most powerful and most
arrogant of the Popes, Innocent III, imposed the obligation of
annual confession upon the entire Church (1215). It was, of course,
those marvelously modern school-men, Aquinas and his
contemporaries, who worked out the theory of it, and instead of it
proving the moral discipline which some historians, eager to oblige
the Church, now profess to find it, the law was followed by quite
the most immoral and vicious period in the history of Europe (1200-
1550). After this long and picturesque history the Council of Trent
declared it a "sacrament."

     Holy Orders (or ordination) is a magical ceremony of which the
clergy very gradually increased the solemnity and complexity in
order to mark off their sacred caste from the laity and enhance
their own prestige. From the Pauline Epistles and the earliest
Christian documents we gather that each "Church," which means
"assembly," was a very democratic community of a few dozen or
score, vague "followers of Christ." The only distinction recognized
amongst them in the last decade of the 1st Century according to the
Letter of the Romans to the Corinthians is that they have
presidents (bishops) and helpers (deacons),. As these things
usually go, they probably had annual elections at which Brother and
Sister So-and-so contrived to got on the committee and Brother or
Father So-and-so, probably the old fellow with the longest beard
and the longest purse, became chairman or overseer. A century
later, when a squabble for the leadership of the Roman community
led to one, and much the better, of the rivals writing a book which


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               21

                   THE HOLY FAITH OF ROMANISTS

we still have, we find that the original weekly or monthly supper
is now a sacred event and round it is gathered a group of clergy
who are definitely cut off as a higher caste. In the squabble an
astute ex-slave got the bishopric, and this unscrupulous adventurer
made a considerable advance in marking off the clergy from the
laity and opened a modest chapel -- a room over a deserted pub
according to one contemporary version -- in which doubtless the
strict dividing line of the sanctuary was drawn. All this was
already done in the Mithraic temples, one of which was a stone's
throw from the Christian conventicle in Rome, so we do not need to
think of hidden Protocols.

     We cannot follow here the slow growth of this arrangement and
of the elaborate consecrating ceremonies, to impress the laity,
which became the Sacrament of Holy Orders. I will add only one
detail. Although the Popes of the 5th Century, finding Europe in
ruins and sinking into profound ignorance, were now able to assert
(with the help of the imperial police -- this is a literal truth)
the sovereignty they had long claimed, they were very small cheese
compared with the Popes of a later date. When one died the people
helped themselves to his table-silver, wines, and anything else
worth looting and then joined the clergy in a new election. On many
such occasions the records tell, the church in which the election-
meetings were held swam with blood. At the election of "St."
Damasus, the darling of the women -- voters, the "butcher's bill"
was nearly 200. However, the people continued to have the chief
vote, since the election was carried by acclamation, in the
election of a Pope until the 11th Century. The priests then had the
assistance of a German army in putting the Roman laity in their
place and making a holier business of the election of a Pope: in
theory, that is to say, like all things Catholic, for the history
of Papal elections during the next five centuries was amazing and
it continued to this day to be an orgy of intrigue and rival
ambitions.

     But the historical details do not matter. It is more
interesting that, as in the case of confession and matrimony, the
elevation of ordination to the rank of a sacrament or "channel of
grace" had in actual fact, as revealed in all contemporary
chronicles, not the least moral result. I am often accused even by
skeptics who fancy themselves far superior to me in emotional
delicacy and intellectual poise of being unable to see or unwilling
to acknowledge "the good side" of these things. To which I reply
that I would rather be truthful than dainty and I am convinced that
it is immeasurably better for the world to ascertain and tell the
facts than to refuse to read the facts so as to be able to say
smooth and conciliatory things. In 1937 I published in Britain a
book titled The Papacy in Polities Today, plainly showing the
Vatican intrigues to that date and warning folk about the future.
In the organ of a group of these superior non-Christian folk the
book was dismissed as "lamentable" and not worth reading. I doubt
if even today they have read a line of the evidence I have
published of the conspiracy of the Black International. There are
thousands of them in America.





                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               22

                   THE HOLY FAITH OF ROMANISTS

     As far as my present subject is concerned these highly
respectable folk say that even if "grace" as a supernatural entity 
does not exist the Catholic scheme of special channels of it and
impressive ceremonies for the young men who are taking the clerical
vow of celibacy and the married couples who are swearing loyalty to
each other for life is admirable and may psychologically have
excellent results. There their knowledge of the matter ends. People
who argue in this way are on exactly the same level of
mischievousness as those who five or six years ago argued that
Fascism and Nazism, with all their faults, were doing good. The
world wants or needs the truth -- facts. And the truth is, and
every year of extension of my fifty years study of history makes it
plainer, that the fabrication of these sacraments by the clergy of
the Roman Church was followed by a more vicious general life in
Europe than we find over an equal period of several centuries in
any earlier civilization. Penance, holy orders, and matrimony were
not dogmatically declared sacraments until the 16th Century. But in
practice they were enforced as such and the basis of them was
constructed by the School-men, in the 13th Century. That century
and the following two are the most vicious period in civilized
history. Sacraments are medieval fabrications of the Black
International to dupe and further enslave the laity.

     There is the same evidence of deliberate priestly fabrication
in every part of the distinctively Catholic structure of doctrine
and practice. One of the next most prominent features is the cult
of Mary and the saints and martyrs. As late as the end of the 4th
Century we find the greatest of the Fathers, Augustine, protesting
against this cult, which was then beginning in the Roman Church;
though he did not know that, as Catholic authorities admit today,
the new cult of martyrs was based upon a mass of audacious
foreigners by the Roman priests. They had their revenge on
Augustine. They forged sermons on Mary in his name, and some of
these are incorporated in the Catholic ritual today.

     The cult of Mary is one of the most glaring innovations of the
latter part of the 4th Century, when the pagans were being forced
by law into the Church. They wanted a goddess so the mother of
Jesus, -- who is given less prominence than Mary Magdalene in the
Gospels and was not honored even in the Roman community for more
than 300 years after her death -- when the supposed tradition ought
to have been freshest -- was decked in all the dazzling robes and
epithets of the old pagan goddesses (Ceres, Ishtar, Anaita, etc.).
When, after an almost unparalled period of artistic dissolution,
art was cultivated once more in Europe, this cult of "the Madonna"
proved a splendid asset to the Church of Rome, and the great age of
Mariolqtry opened. As if in unconscious mockery of the theory of
Trpdition it got worse in modern times. Apologists profess that
while doctrine certainly "developed" there is in this no
inconsistency with their theory of Tradition or "a deposit of
faith" (kept, doubtless, in the Sacred Archives of the Vatican).
Any man who is not under the hypnotic influence of the Catholic
atmosphere smiles. The pure Christianity of the first three
centuries and the Reformed Christianity which returned to the
Gospels in the 16th Century rejected the cult. It began as a
concession to paganism, it developed more richly in the Middle
Ages( as a concession to the weird mixture of paganism and 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               23

                   THE HOLY FAITH OF ROMANISTS

Christianity in the art of the Middle Ages, and it was encouraged
to develop still more in modern times because it appeals to the
imagination of the emotions as few other dogmas do. The language
itself in the hymns to Mary today surpasses that of hymns and
prayers to the old pagan goddesses, and grown-up men in New York
and Boston lustily sing such things as "when wicked men blaspheme
thee, I'll lay me down and die," while frivolous city stenographers
and store assistants sing: "Holy Mary, let me come soon to be with
thee in thy home." It is part of the doctrine that when Mary died
her body was physically transported by angels into heaven, (now
called the stratosphere -- but I suppose that is blasphemy, so I
must look out for pious gunmen). The "rosary," a string, of 50
small and 5 large beads, to count 50 prayers to Mary and 5 to God,
became in the modern world one of the chief symbols of "the pure
religion of Jesus." Bogus shrines like Lourdes in France and St.
Annes in Canada attracted millions -- to the great profit of the
Black International.

     I have no space to trace even in the same very brief manner
all the other peculiarities of "the Holy Faith." The upshot is the
same. Doctrine and practice "developed" in exactly the same way a
great store like Marshall Fields developed. New attractions were
required to sustain or to increase profits. Age by age the
structure of the faith, with its gargoyles and its buttresses, its
dark corners and its theatrical mummery, was built up, and on every
stone of the structure is stamped the word "Priestcraft." at the
American public should in the fourth decade of the 20th century and
in its chief work of reference be confronted with a solemn
statement that all this was done in conformity with unwritten
instructions given to Peter 1900 years ago is an insult to
Intelligence: that the Fulton Sheens should be in a position to
claim blandly over the ether that the structure is so chaste, so
graceful, so logical that no "foeman worthy of their steel" will
venture to criticize it, while all the world knows what funds and
organizations they have for stifling criticism, is a menace and
disgrace.

                            Chapter V

                 HOW THE GENERAL PUBLIC IS DUPED

     This situation would make the social student and the reformer
wonder, if they ever candidly confronted, it, whether a very large
part of the public is not kept in a mental atmosphere which must
have a dangerous effect on its attitude to more practical problems;
and the ease with which the entire population has been led during
years into a poisonous swamp, the mischievous action to the last
moment of American Catholics, and the stubborn adherence even now
of Canadian Catholics to that policy show that in fact this doping
of the Catholic mind by the priests is a real national and
international evil. But how do they succeed in drugging some
15,000,000 people in a country that spends more on education and
cultural establishments than any other country in the world? And
how is it that the general public is so far deceived that few
recognize the intellectual insipidity of the creed and the scheming
of priesthood?



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               24

                   THE HOLY FAITH OF ROMANISTS

     The first question requires a thorough reply, and this will be
provided in the next book, but let me recall several elements of
the reply that I have already given. The Catholic body may be
predominantly urban, but it has not the psychological features of
urban life. Instead of being stimulated by community life it is
taught to regard the community as evil and free discussion as a
sin. It is composed to an extraordinary extent of immigrants from
the rural regions of less-educated countries (Poland, Slovakia,
Erie Italy, etc.) and their families, and the priests take care
that in the matter of religion they shall still have a link with
the motherland. The bulk of the remainder are folk who, since they
are taught to regard as particularly sinful the reading of any
literature that might unsettle their faith and assured that the
writers are conscious or unconscious agents of the devil, might
almost as well live still in Kerry or Apulia for all the influence
of modem culture on them.

     As to the "educated" Catholics we saw what such education is.
Everybody knows that many of them do defy the Church and read
modern books, without troubling to get the priest's permission and
are healthily skeptical about much that the Church teaches. If you
bear in mind that the Church does not merely forbid such reading
but dogmatically teaches that it is a mortal sin like fornication,
you see that these men and women, while professing to be members of
the Church, must repudiate its authority, when it suits them, to
say what is or is not a sin and thus reject a fundamental part of
the creed. They formally remain in the Church for reasons which it
drastically condemns. The mortal sin of heresy not merely to say
but to believe in one's own mind that a dogma of the faith is not
literally true. The amiable writers who speculate on the Church of
Rome from without and think that it is just as easy for Catholics
to take their peculiar doctrines figuratively as it is for members
of the Episcopal Church do not know what they are talking about.
And where these "liberal" Catholics are "converts" you will be
interested to know that before they were received into the Church
they made a solemn declaration of literal acceptance, not of the
religion as a whole, but of each one, individually, of a long and
complete list of the dogmas which was presented to them to recite.

     I will tell the sad story of Catholic Modernism in the next
book and will add only one further point here. It would be a
reflection on the intelligence of one-sixth of the American people
if we were to suppose that, even taking into account their vast
funds and powerful organization, the priests actually hold the
loyalty of 20,000,000 to 25,000,000 people, according to their
various estimates, to this weird synthetic creed. We saw that, on
the contrary, the leakage is enormous, and that even when they give
the figure of 18,000,000 they include, and on the law of their
Church must include, people who have quit it. Another striking
proof of this reaches me as I write this book.

     It is announced in some of the papers -- most of them, as
usual, suppress the news as "offensive to Catholics" -- that the
religious census compiled by the military authorities from the
interrogation of recruits show that 31 percent of the men were
baptized Roman Catholics. This means that about 40,000,000 of the
present inhabitants of the United States had Catholic baptism and 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               25

                   THE HOLY FAITH OF ROMANISTS

are in the canonical sense Catholics. There is no ground whatever,
to suggest that the recruits were in any large proportion taken
from the Catholic more than the Protestant body, and it is clear
that more than half these men, though still fairly young, left the
Church so long ago that it is unknown to the priests of the
districts in which they live that they are really "subjects of the
Pope." They mainly represent that drift from the faith of boys who
have left the Catholic primary school, a drift which some Catholic
authorities estimate at between 60 and 80 percent of the whole. It
is a nice reflection on that "statistical" work, which I examined
in the second book, in which Fr. Shaugnessy learnedly proves that
there is no drift whatever! It seems to be about twice as bad as
even I estimated, and it is fairly certain that there are at all
events not more than 15,000,000 actual Catholics, half of whom are
children and most of the remainder peculiarly ignorant, in the
United States.

     This at once gives us one of the ways in which the general
public are duped According to the statistics of religion which are
given in all reference books the Roman Church has twice as many
members as any other Church in America or more than one-third of
the Christians of the country. The meaning of this -- the heavy
Catholic immigration from backward countries -- is, of course,
never pointed out in the papers, and the naturally large increase
of such a body at each decennial census is not explained. In fact
the government officials who publish the figures generally make
remarks about the "extraordinary increase" -- no one knows better
than they that the increase is not as great as that of the general
population -- and, while they are quite scientific in their
analyses of and notes on the figures in all other respects they
never warn the readers that, unlike other Churches, the Roman
Church does not admit that seceders have seceded from it.

     The net result is that the general public are grossly deceived
about the largeness and growth of the Romanist body, and this makes
them very receptive to Catholic propaganda of the broader kind: the
sort of propaganda that does not make you eager to enter the Church
and endorse its creed but disposes you to look upon the Roman
Church as a really unique body and superior to other Churches.
Skeptics of the last century, and far too many even in our time,
had a theory that the Roman Church has a far better chance of
survival than its rivals. If in this they were regarding the wealth
and power of its organization and the unscrupulousness of its
methods we could see nothing more than an exaggerated estimate in
the theory but they meant and mean, much more than this. They meant
that the doctrinal structure of the Roman Church was less likely
than that of other Churches to be affected by the corrosive forces
of the new age. Their idea of the difference is summed up in the
phrase "Rome or Reason." The world of the future was to be divided
between those who admitted the exercise of reason on religious
matters and would all become Rationalists and those who repudiated
the application of reason and based their faith upon authority.

     I have elsewhere shown that there is no such fundamental
distinction between the Catholic and Protestant Churches. We have,
in fact, seen repeatedly in these pages that Catholic writers claim
that they alone in the modern world are logical and that what they 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               26

                   THE HOLY FAITH OF ROMANISTS

want to face is "Intellectual" opposition. But it suits their
purpose to make use of the conclusion to which this Rome-or-Reason
theory leads, and they freely quote predictions of future triumphs
of their Church. They still drag out periodically and polish up the
famous prediction of Macaulay -- never mentioning, of course, that
he had a profound contempt for the doctrines and brutal methods of
Rome -- that the rule of the Vatican would still spread over the
earth when tourists from the other side of the world came to see
the melancholy ruins of London (which to Macaulay, as a good
Englishman, meant thousands of years in the future). They quote
Wells (whom they hate) telling, amongst his anticipations, how
monks with shaven polls will be conspicuous figures in the
scientific cities of the future, or Bodley, who at one time had a
high reputation in America, predicting that by the end of the
present century there would be 70,000,000 Catholics in the United
States. and a corresponding increase of the Catholic population all
over the world. If these critical writers -- two Protestants and
one Rationalist -- so candidly admit the triumphant progress of the
Roman Church it must, the general public think, really have
something of the unique nature and unconquerable spirit which it
claims.

     A good journalist would, of course, riddle theme predictions
with his shot in ten minutes. Macaulay was more rhetorical than
scientific in his essays, and he rather lazily suggested that a
Church which had survived all the onslaughts of seventeen centuries
-- he quite admitted that it was by the use of violent and
unscrupulous; methods -- would probably continue to survive. Wells
had the wrong idea that Catholic faith was based upon an emotional
trust in authority: which his particular opponent, Hilaire Belloc,
would have described as the sloppy Protestant idea of faith. Baldly
estimated that there would be 70,000,000 Catholics in America at
the end of this century because he calculated that the total
population would be 400,000,000: which would leave the proportion
of Catholic to general population just the same as Baldly
understood it to be at the time when he wrote. This critical
journalist would further point out that a Church which claims only
to make 20,000 to 25,000 converts a year and admits a serious
leakage does not show any promise of fulfilling these predictions,
and that in point of fact even the figures supplied by the Catholic
hierarchy to the authorities at each decennial census show, when
the birth-rate is taken into account (to say nothing of fresh
immigration and a claim of 250,000 converts a decade), not an
increase in the number of Catholics but a very notable decrease. He
would, in fine, easily learn that the Catholic, figures grossly
deceive the general public because while a Protestant minister may
hopefully include in his list folk in his parish who have ceased to
attend his church, the Catholic priest includes such seceders on
principle and denies their right to secede from the Church.

     But there is no such journalist in America (or Britain). No
paper would print such material. Any editor who ventured to do so
would lose his job. Not only would his circulation and his revenue
from advertisements be threatened but to an unknown extent the
Church buys up shares in American papers. Lecturing -- not on
religion or the Roman Church -- in Seattle a few years ago I
learned that one of the dailies made various excuses for not 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               27

                   THE HOLY FAITH OF ROMANISTS

inserting the advertisement of my lectures. My agent, a local
business man, was persistent, and he found, to his astonishment,
that through the bishop the Roman Church held a high proportion of
the shares in the paper. Haldeman-Julius has told in his paper how
after his advertisements had been accepted and inserted in some
papers a hidden hand intervened, and no more advertisements were
accepted and even a public apology made for the insertion. We speak
ironically when we call it a "hidden" hand. You can smell the holy
oil on it, even when it acts through a Knight of Columbus as a
member of the Holy Family Society.

     Editors and journalists, often ashamed of the pressure to
which economic necessity compels them to yield, evolve their own
defense-mechanism. As good Americans they are not going to
encourage the disruption of community-life by this "sectarian
strife." Moreover, the Roman Church is really exceptionally
entitled to respect. Look at its long and glorious history -- as
told now by certain professors who are, like themselves,
intimidated by it. took at Its world-wide spread, its primacy
amongst the Christian sects (if not all religions), the great names
(of dead men) it has an its roll of honor, the world-prestige of
its venerable and once more royal head, its vast wealth, its unique
organization, its privileged position in Washington, and so on. So
every Catholic event is written up by Catholic members of the staff
on their knees. A Eucharistic Congress? Not a word must be said to
the public about the childish Catholic doctrine that is at the root
of it. A canonization? Not a word about how the Vatican claims that
the "saint" literally wrought miracles and the Italian clergy at
all events lined their pockets at the expense of the country to
which the saint belongs. Diplomatic courtesies with Japan? Not a
word about how these have gone on since 1930 and the Vatican, by
its international influence, mightily helped Japan to hoodwink
America and the world.

     So it goes on. As I write, some of the papers announce that
the French general who hag "escaped" from Germany and gone to the
holy shrine of Vichy, the foulest nest of treachery in Europe, took
a message that the Catholic industrialists of Germany are prepared,
in collusion with the army-leaders to destroy Hitlerism and make
peace with Britain and America. The condition implied is that
Catholicism shall be restored in Germany and continue to hold the
position it has won by treachery in Belgium, France, Italy, Spain,
Slovakia, etc. It is, of course, nonsense, but the remark leaves on
the mind a vague feeling that the Roman Church has vast
potentialities of service. It is unique. That, or the reputation
for it, is its strength. And all this subservience of the press
which it now commands hides the real uniqueness which ought to put
it on the same level in the public mind as the Holy Rollers or the
Seventh Day Adventists. Its creed is uniquely contemptible amongst
the major branches of the Christian religion and more redolent of
deliberate priestcraft than any other. "Can such a faith survive?"
is the title given by an Angelican bishop to a series of sermons he
gave on the theology of his Church. Yes, he said, by jettisoning
half its dogmas, literally understood. But the Church of Rome
survives, ravaged it is true but still massive, without the
sacrifice of a line of its creed. How? To that question we must
next address ourselves.


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               28




                        28 page printout

    Reproducible Electronic Publishing can defeat censorship.

          This file, its printout, or copies of either
          are to be copied and given away, but NOT sold.

          Bank of Wisdom, Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                          ****     ****

Edited by E. Haldeman-Julius

THE BLACK INTERNATIONAL                 No. 15

                  THE CHURCH DEFIES MODERN LIFE

           ONE SOUND CATHOLIC BOAST - WE NEVER CHANGE

                        by Joseph McCabe

                  HALDEMAN-JULIUS PUBLICATIONS
                     GIRARD  -- : --  KANSAS

                          ****     ****

   CHAPTER
     I    The Hell-Ethic and Modern Psychology ................. 1

    II    Orimitive Superstitions About Sex .................... 7

   III    Saints and Other Holy Men ........................... 13

    IV    Why Priests Do Not Marry ............................ 19

     V    Melodrama About the World, the Flesh, and the Devil.. 24

                          ****     ****

                            Chapter I

              THE HELL-ETHIC AND MODERN PSYCHOLOGY

     It is not long since we were all laughing at a crazy film
titled "Hellzapoppin." Probably the most sedate amongst us really
enjoyed the overture -- or ought we to call it the Sacred Prelude?
-- giving us an up-to-date picture of the hectic life in the
underworld. My mind, when I saw it, recalled a little old 14th-
century church in a rural part of England where one can still see
on the wall, in a remarkable state of preservation, an immense
fresco of life on the earth and beneath it which pious hands had
painted on it nearly 600 years ago; and believe me, Hollywood might
have taken the lower part of the fresco as the model for the
prelude to "Hellzapoppin." But if you had smiled at the picture in
the 14th Century, as we do today, you would have been dispatched to
your destination prematurely.

     No other equal stretch of human history has seen such
revolutionary changes as the last 600 years. From the cross-bow to
the machine-gun and the aerial torpedo: from the galleon to the
latest battleship with 16-inch guns: from daubs on the wall, lit by


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               1

                  THE CHURCH DEFIES MODERN LIFE

tallow-candles, to superb talking picture's in technicolor: from
villages to cities of 8,000,000 folk with 50-story buildings: from
crabbed manuscripts to princely free libraries and news flashed
from continent to continent in the time it takes you to cross a
street. ... But the richest and most powerful Church in America
still gathers folk, in dazzling New York or nerve-racking Chicago
or aristocratic Washington, to hear the preacher tell about the
legions of devils that hunger for their souls and the vast lakes of
fire underground into which they may slip at any moment.

     Come, Mr. McCabe, some of you will say, it is nearly half a
century since you left the Church of Rome and in that swift-moving
half-century it has doubtless changed considerably. If you think
so, ask a child from a Catholic school, any school, whether or no
they still teach it that it walks through life with an invisible
"guardian angel" on its right side and an invisible devil with a
quite peculiar rage to lead it astray on the other: whether they do
not teach it, as a living dogma of its religion, that the boy of
eight who has called another by one of the lurid names they so
easily pick up, or the pretty golden-haired girl of eight who has
permitted one of those little liberties that children do, will not,
if killed in a street-accident on the way home, go to a hell of
eternal fire and torturing devils. Open a Catholic hymn-book and
see how these Catholic folk with whom you drink beer and crack
jokes still sing on Sundays -- and very lustily -- how "hell is
raging for my soul" and dab themselves with holy water to keep the
devils away. Read any book you like about Catholic doctrine today,
and you will find that the dogma of eternal torment, to which all
over the age of seven are liable, is as binding as it was in days
of the Council of Trent or is in any chapel in Kentucky or Georgia,
and that the belief in devils -- swarms of them -- is as fresh and
childlike as it was in ancient Babylon in the days of Hammurabi
4,000 years ago.

     Naturally a preacher in one of those city-churches to which
the artists and literary men, who lend their names to the Church,
go, knows which dogmas to emphasize and which to keep in the
shadow, but let him or one of his artistic followers put in print
that Rome has abandoned the doctrines of hell and out he will go on
his neck. During my final years in the Church, in the last decade
of the last century, we took great pride in the fact that one
fairly well known British scientist, Prof. St. George Mivart, was
"one of us." When I quit the Church he sought me and, for his own
intellectual credit, be said, told me how he despised the most
fundamental dogmas and promised me that he would speak out. He
opened with an article in which he rejected the dogma of hell. And
he was at once excommunicated and was driven to death by the fury
of the Black International that erupted; though my professor of
theology, Father D. Fleming, one of the most learned priests in
London, and my professor of philosophy, Msgr. (later Cardinal)
Mercier, had told me and him that they agreed with him.

     If any one of those few professors of science who today call
themselves Catholics dared similarly to repudiate the belief in an
eternal hell in a published writing he would have the same
experience. I have just been reading an American Catholic work, 'A
Call to Catholic Action,' in which a score of priest's who are at 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               2

                  THE CHURCH DEFIES MODERN LIFE

the head of the modern movement in the Church give two volumes of
up-to-date advice to the laity, especially to those who are urging
their faith upon the notice of America. What is their bugle-call?
Or what is the fight to which they call the laity? They tell us
that it is primarily "a fight against Satan, the world, and the
flesh." That takes you back inexorably to the drowsy atmosphere of
that little 14th-century church in the heart of rural Britain. Nay,
if you know social history, it takes you back to the dark-skinned
curly-locked folk in long woolen tunics who confessed their sin's
to the priests and sought to dodge the innumerable devils in the
courtyard round the pyramid-temple of Marduk in ancient Babylon.

     I wish a few folk at Hollywood would read some of the essays
or sermons in this 'Call to Catholic Action.' They are cursing --
and half America curses with them -- the servility which they have
to show to a Catholic censor: a gentleman who acts in the interest
of his Church but assures them that it is only because "the public
does not really want this kind of thing, you know." Yet here are
the leaders of Catholic Action warning their followers that the
American movies are the chief agency of the devil. Here is a
celibate (we hope) monk with the sound American name of Father
Schmiedeler who describes what a hell city life is in America. It
appears that the good monk thinks that life in small towns and
villages is more virtuous. ... Anyhow here is his description of
the city:

          As matters stand at present even the most, shielded, the
     best of homes, can hardly expect to escape the contaminating
     ting even into the innermost recesses of the family sanctuary,
     influence of the moral contagion that surrounds them. By means
     of the press and radio, the movie-hall and the dance-hall, the
     lecture-room, and platform, our communities are being infested
     with a poison of immorality that is gradually penetrating all.

     Of all these devices of Satan the movies, he says, are "the
worst offenders," and there has been "a growing stench for the past
several decades" from them. The monk seems to have been more
fortunate in his choice of pictures than I have been, for it is a
very long time since I saw films that correspond to his description
of, presumably, what he saw.

     This particular campaign of the Black International inspires
many reflections, and I will enlarge on two of them in this
chapter. The first is that many will ask me whether the clergy and
spinsters of other Churches are not in this respect as bad as the
clergy-spinsters of the Church of Rome. On the face of it, yes, and
we must not forget this. But there are material differences. The
Baptists claim to number 8,000,000, the Catholics 20,000,000. The
Baptists are thickest in Texas, Georgia, North and South Carolina,
Alabama, and Virginia: the Catholics in New York, Pennsylvania,
Massachusetts, Illinois, and New Jersey, half the total body being
in these five states. Baptists may bully authorities in Dayton but
not in Boston, Chicago, New York, Detroit, Washington, Baltimore,
and San Francisco.





                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               3

                  THE CHURCH DEFIES MODERN LIFE

     And this broad difference in psychology between Fundamentalist
and Catholic hellism, as we may call it, entails a very
considerable difference between the rival clerical bodies.
Skepticism amongst preachers of hell in Georgia and Alabama is
uncommon, but it is so widespread in the Papist Black International
that one may seriously doubt if one preacher in three really
believes in hell and the devil or honestly shudders at the thought
of the world and the flesh. Certainly the overwhelming majority of
the Fundamentalist preachers of hell believe that the New Testament
is the Word of God, and the Gospels and Paul very clearly teach the
dogma of eternal punishment. The Roman clergy on the other hand, no
matter what proportion of them you regard as sincere, have mainly
a professional interest in the belief. It is not only the chief
source of their power over the ignorant but one of the principal
sources of their vast profit.

     It puzzles folk when I say that relatively few Catholics fear
hell, but if you reflect on the general geniality, if not gaiety,
of a Catholic district or country (Eire, etc.) you realize that
this must be true. The Catholic system is based upon an escapist
psychology. Like the priests of ancient Egypt, who taught the
people that the journey to the garden of Osiris after death was
beset by monstrous perils and hordes of demons but they could sell
you charms for post-mortem use which defeated the devils, Catholic
priests neutralize the effect which their grim doctrine ought to
have upon the emotions by assuring the people that they have the
power to save even the most hardened sinner from the penalty. Most
Egyptologists believe that the common folk of Egypt -- nine-tenths
of the nation -- were not promised immortality, which had hitherto
been reserved for kings and nobles, until about B.C. 1400. No one
professes to find any change in the light morals of the Egyptian
workers and middle class when this idea that they had a risky
chance of an eternal bliss was extended to them, and the late Prof.
Breasted used to say this was because the post-mortem risk was
practically abolished by the priests, through their sale of charms
land spells, in the same breath in which they gave the people the
glorious promise of immortality, of which they do not seem to have
taken any serious notice.

     It is much the same in Catholic theology. For a hundred years
or more the first Christian communities were very solemn little
groups of folk who really thought a lot about sin and hell. Then
the Roman Popes, particularly the blackguardly Papal adventurer
"St." Callistus I (207-22), discovered that they could absolve from
any sin of any size or hue if you confessed it to a priest, and
Roman Christian life -- I am quoting one of them -- became more
picturesque and highly colored. Catholic censors would certainly
not permit Hollywood to screen it. The faithful did not directly
pay for absolution, but there was rich indirect payment in the fact
that, as we positively know, the membership of the Church rapidly
increased threefold or more, and there were large numbers of light-
living but wealthy Roman ladies amongst the converts.

     Yet, since death does not always wait for you to summon a
priest to absolve you, hell remained rather a tough proposition in
the mind of many, and was a stumbling block to the cultured; and,
above all, it was not as profitable as one could wish. The priests 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               4

                  THE CHURCH DEFIES MODERN LIFE

therefore took up a theory of a few rationalizing theologians: the
theory of purgatory. These theologians, who were heretics while
they lived, felt that there must be two furnaces in the cosmic
basement: one for the more terrible sinners, such as the man who
thrashed a priest he found with his wife or the man who died
without asking the priest's ministrations, and one for lighter
offenders and those who had substantially liquidated the debt by
confession. One was eternal and in the other you burned only for a
time. How could you be sure of a ticket for Furnace No. 2 instead
of No. 1? Practically every Catholic believes that he is booked at
least for this. Here the clergy opened a vein of gold in the hard
rock of dogma. Absolution got you clear of "the fire that is never
extinguished," and they invented a dozen ways of evading or very
considerably reducing your stay in "the flames of Purgatory." And
nearly all of them -- indulgences, alms, relies, pilgrimages, etc.
-- cost money.

     That is the big difference between the Catholic hell-scheme
and the Protestant. I have nothing to do here with the question
whether one is more reasonable, or less nauseous, than the other.
I am concerned only with the psychological question of influence on
behavior and with the enormous power which the Catholic scheme
gives to the clergy. The latter point is obvious. One of the many
features -- besides chronic war, pestilence, poor and monotonous
food for nine-tenths of the people, ruthless exploitation by the
nobles, etc. -- which made life in the Age of Faith so "jolly," as
the late G.K. Chesterton used to say, was that now and again, when
a king refused to heed the crack of the ecclesiastical whip, the
Pope would put an interdict on the kingdom. Living under Nazi or
Jap invaders today is pleasant in comparison. The whole scheme of
salvation was suspended. The Pope locked up the keys of purgatory
as well as heaven in his safe, leaving the gates of hell wide open.

     However, we are here more interested in the psychological
aspect. Those finer-natured non-Catholic writers who give so much
pleasure to the clergy explain Catholic life, in the Middle Ages or
today, on Catholic theory. It must have been happy and virtuous. It
is so much easier, as well as more conducive to good will, to
explain life in that way. Unfortunately I, being cursed with a
Materialist, and Atheist creed, have to make laborious research
into facts and tell the truth; which is that life in the Middle
Ages was generally foul, is generally foul in Catholic countries
today, and in the Catholic section of American life is painfully
rich in criminals.

     The working of the hell-ethic explains this. Modern psychology
is precisely a study of conduct or behavior and in one branch it
examines the motive as shaping forces of conduct. They are all
lodged in the organism from without. You must, it is true, make
some allowance for hereditary bodily equipment. Some females have
richer glands of a certain kind in their ovaries and pituitaries.
just as they may have better stomachs or stronger hearts than
others, and these are destined by nature to be our scarlet sinners.
The Vestal Virgin type, on the other hand. ... But I will leave
that to a later chapter. The point is that Catholic conduct is
shaped by environmental influences just like any other, and this
persistent influence of the hell-and-devil motif from infancy 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               5

                  THE CHURCH DEFIES MODERN LIFE

onward, in school and church and Catholic literature, is morbid.
The hell-ethic never did produce nice types of character. "Saints"
are not people who were so very, very good because they feared
hell. And nowadays it is worse education than ever. The boy or girl
has been taught for year's to take it mighty seriously, and then he
or she goes to see "Hellzapoppin" and hears nine-tenths of the
audience roar with laughter. I am not very familiar with jail-
circles, though have corresponded with criminals in San Quentin,
but I believe that the large Catholic population in Sing Sing or
Joliet is not conspicuously depressed by thought of hell and the
devil.

     Let no one be tempted to conclude from all this that the
Catholic Church today does not really require the same belief in
hell and the devil as a colored preacher in Georgia does. Make no
mistake about it. The Church insists on it as an Article of Faith
-- a doctrine automatically endorsed by every man who calls himself
a Catholic -- as it did in the days of Torquemada. Look up the
article on it in the most authoritative exposition of Catholic
teaching, the 'Catholic Encyclopedia.' The article "Hell" is
written by a Dutch Jesuit -- did no American priest care to have
the honor? -- and is meticulously accurate.

     Hell as a place of eternal torment is, he says, a fundamental
Catholic doctrine. It is "a definite place, but where it is we do
not know." The learned professor agrees with "theologians
generally" that it is "really within the earth." This preposterous
rubbish was written and printed in the most costly enterprise of
the American Church in the year 1910 when physicists had come to
fairly definite conclusions about the colossal concentration of
metal in the center of the earth. However, I hasten to add, in case
you are thinking of becoming a Catholic, that the Church does not
dogmatically say where hell is, merely that it is a place, not a
state or a figure of speech. So far, says the Jesuit in this
princely publication of the American Church, the doctrine of hell,
leaving out for the moment the question of its eternity and apart,
of course, from these disreputable Atheists, "has never yet [19101
met any opposition worthy of mention." Yes, I assure you I cleaned
my glasses specially to read it again. Dean Farrer, the greatest
preacher of the Church of England, denied it in the pulpit of St.
Paul's Cathedral in 1878, and the rejection has spread so far in
his Church and the sister Church in America that at the Lambert
Conference of 1930 the combined British and American bishops
virtually cut it out of the catechism. We will say nothing about
the Unitarians, Congregationalists, and a large part of the
Methodists. Not worth mentioning -- by a Catholic writing for
Catholics.

     This dogma, that men are punished in some place after death,
can, says our authoritative guide, "be demonstrated by the light of
pure reason." You will have to read the lengthy proofs yourself. I
am a man of delicate stomach. That the punishment is eternal is an
obligatory dogma, but this also can be defended by pure reason, or
by Catholic logic, which is the only perfect logic in the modern
world. But that the instrument of torture is material fire is not
an Article of Faith. It is merely the teaching of "the greater
number of theologians." It is also the conviction of the writer of 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               6

                  THE CHURCH DEFIES MODERN LIFE

the article, and since he was selected by the editor of the work as
more authoritative than any American priest could be, it is the
version of Catholic doctrine recommended to America by this most
costly enterprise of the hierarchy. The great and so modern Thomas
Aquinas showed long ago, the Jesuit reminds us, that the Catholic
need not feel any difficulty at all about how a material fire can
burn pure (disembodied) spirits. With God all things are possible.
... No, I am not being flippant, That is the, argument. But the
Church, you may be relieved to know, has never dogmatically
declared that the form of torture is fire. Those choice bits of the
missionary preacher on hell are just illustrations of what "the
greater numbers of theologians" teach.

     I still remember one such gem; and it is not a reminiscence of
boyhood. but part of an address to the monks of my monastery -- I
was then about 26 and a professor -- delivered with great solemnity
by the learned Fr. David Fleming who, he later let me know, did not
believe in hell. The burning, he said, was so intense that if there
were a ladder of infinite length reaching up from the pit and every
rung was a razor but there was a cup-full of water at the top the
damned would jostle each other in their eagerness to mount it. The
Catholic is not compelled to believe in the fire but "he is
compelled to believe that these disembodied souls or "pure spirits"
are punished for all eternity by some variety of "sensory torture"
(paena memus). So if you prefer to think of a combination of
intense thirst, toothache. sciatica, racks, thumbscrews, etc.,
instead of fire, go to it. The Chinese have nothing on theme Roman
interpreters of what they call "God's holy purposes." Historians
give as the choicest piece of cruelty in one of the most cruel
periods of civilized history -- in Papal Italy during the "best"
part of the later Middle Ages -- that two nobles invented a system
of torture which crowded the maximum possible of pain in forty days
(in honor of Lent) without killing the patient. Only forty days!
The theologian spine it out to eternity.

                           Chapter II

                PRIMITIVE SUPERSTITION ABOUT SEX

     I am devoting a later book in this series to a candid
examination of what the Catholic, under priestly hypnotism, calls
"our Holy Faith" and believes to be so unique and beautiful a body
of doctrine that his Church is fully entitled to boast of being
"intolerant" and to claim the right to burn apostates. I had,
however, to glance at this exquisite specimen of the Holy Faith as
a basis for the present booklet. Let me complete it by glancing at
another doctrine, and we will better understand the Church's
attitude to the world.

     The escape from this unpleasant region in the center of the
globe is technically called "salvation" and the failure to escape
it "damnation"; and from the respect with which the latter word is
always breathed by your neighbors you will gather how the horrid
possibility weighs upon the mind of the race. Now it is a very
trite expression of Catholic literature that the Church is "the Ark
of Salvation" -- an allusion, of course, to the ancient Sumerian
folk-story of the Ut-Napishtim and the Deluge -- and the question 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               7

                  THE CHURCH DEFIES MODERN LIFE

is often discussed whether Catholics hold that "outside the Church
there is no salvation." I am not going to be dragged aside on every
page to discuss the beauty or, as you prefer, the puerility of
these doctrines. We are concerned here with the power they give to
the Black International and their influence in the general Catholic
attitude.

     In the Calvert Handbook which, you will remember, is sponsored
by Dr. Nicholas Murray Butler and other high academic authorities,
this is the theme of the first article, and it is one of the most
dishonest of the bunch. The Church, it insists, certainly does not
say that outside of it there is no salvation. In proof of this the
writer quotes the muddle-headed Plus IX (no reference given, but
clearly over 70 years ago) saying solemnly:

          We must all hold as certain that ignorance of the true
     religion when it is invincible, excuses from all fault in the
     sight of the Lord.

     Marvelous. In plain English, if any person never heard of the
Catholic Church or its teaching the Lord will not damn him for not
being a Catholic. The writer's ingenious twist of this into a
statement that it covers Protestants who know the Church well and
loathe it need not be examined. Turn to the more authoritative
Catholic Encyclopedia, and you will find that the spokesman
selected to tell America what the Church really holds, not an
anonymous journalist but the Rev. Prof. Pohle (article
"Toleration"), not only admits that it is sound Catholic doctrine
that "outside the Church there is no salvation" but proves the
justice of it with all the rigor of ideal Catholic logic. Here I
had better give the full passage:

          If by conceding a convenient right of option or a falsely
     understood freedom of faith she [the Church] were to leave
     everyone at liberty to accept or reject her dogmas, her
     constitution, and her sacraments, as the existing differences
     of religions compel the modern State to do, she would not only
     fail in her divine mission but would end her life in voluntary
     suicide. As the true God can tolerate no strange gods, the
     true Church of Christ can tolerate no strange Churches beside
     herself. ... A strictly logical consequence of this
     incontestably fundamental idea is the ecclesiastical dogma,
     that outside the Church there is no salvation ... this
     proposition is necessarily and indissolubly connected with the
     above-mentioned principle of the exclusive legitimacy of truth
     and with the whole ethical commandment of love for the truth
     (XIV, 766).

     Then are all the rest of the world apart from the 180,000,000
Catholics damned? Bless you, the Church does not say anything so
horrid; he adds, you see, the Church does not damn anybody. That is
God's business. How is that for logic?

     It is this kind of logic that gives the Black International
all its arrogance and intolerance and the faithful their weird
belief that their faith is uniquely holy and beautiful. It is this
that explains their melodramatic defiance of the modern world. I 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               8

                  THE CHURCH DEFIES MODERN LIFE

am, you will remember, in this second series of booklets explaining
that the Church of Rome is, contrary to what its apologists
commonly say in America, of such a nature that it inevitably
grasped at the invitation to ally itself with Germany, Italy, and
Japan. Some very ingenious pages, in the style of your literary
oracles, could be written on the psychological affinity of the
Black International and the Axis. Men who, in the name of the
Almighty, preach weekly that he and they calmly contemplate about
a million mortals a week passing into the eternal fires (or other
torments) would not worry as much as the rest of us if their high
aims had to be attained by a little temporary suffering like that
of the British in Singapore or the Poles in Warsaw. However I am
not a literary man and prefer to tell the truth, which is that
heaven knows how few of the priests really believe in hell.

     And in this it defies the modern world as flatly as it defies
modern thought and sentiment with its crude medieval dogmas. It
does not talk much about the devil except in the Catholic school
and church. Outsiders are apt to be so rude as to laugh. But the
world and the flesh! My word, we are a wicked lot. Some of the
sermons in that 'Call to Catholic Action' from which I quoted make
me feel quite uncomfortable. I roam in thought over this metropolis
of 8,000,000 folk which I know pretty intimately, since I have
lived and wandered in all sorts of odd corners of it for 60 years,
and I feel that I must be more myopic than I thought. I have not
seen a drunken man or a fight (such as you see daily in Catholic
Eire) for years and have very rarely seen any approach to the
indecency that was a joke on the streets in the Ages of Faith.

     To be brief and practical, behind all this sulfurated hydrogen
emitted by the clergy is their professional preoccupation with sex.
We shall see presently why I say "professional" and how incongruous
it is in a body of religious ministers which is, taking one country
with another, the most "immoral" in the world. Let us first
consider it in itself: which is not as easy as at first sight you
might imagine.

     The priests exhort their followers to marry early and beget as
many children as they possibly can. No holds barred. In America
they have to say this holds good even if you (if not a Catholic)
got your license from a civic official instead of a priest. In
Scotland it applies if two young folk have married without priest
or registrar. They dare not say in America that it does not apply
if men or women were divorced and married again. What if it was a
Reno divorce? A Yucatan divorce? The dividing line wavers and grows
thin. Yet if you are the wrong side of that line you get poured
upon you the dregs of the moralist's dictionary. He thinks public
corruption regrettable and the exploitation of the helpless poor
just too bad; but a sex-act on the wrong side of the line is foul,
obscene, swinish, loathsome, revolting, etc., etc. The novelist who
speaks lightly of it has a mind like a sewer, a cesspool, or a sty.
Those pictures in which you see the dainty, fascinating, glamorous
ladies of Hollywood, who seem to bring a current of fresh air into
your jaded mind once or twice a week, really (Father Schmiedeler
assures you) exhale a "growing stench."




                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               9

                  THE CHURCH DEFIES MODERN LIFE

     And it is not a question of a snare subtly set here and there
by the invisible devils. Modern American literature and art are one
comprehensive conspiracy to bring upon a poor Catholic girl the
fate that is worse than death. In this 'Call to Catholic Action'
one writer who is styled "His Excellency the Most Rev. Joseph
Schrembs" -- he must be very important but I do not know why --
says apropos of films, that the Church found itself "confronted
with a gigantic industry that was disseminating the doctrines of
pagan morality." He hints that he and others marshalled the pure
maids of his Church in a Legion of Decency and they used their box-
office power to change all that, but on another page of the same
book Fr. Schmiedeler says that the "stench" increases year by year.
Another priest similarly describes practically the whole of
American fiction.

     By the way, I had overlooked this precious piece of Catholic
literature when (in No. 13) I described the cultural poverty of the
Church in America. The Jesuit Daly here admits and explains it. He
says that "the cultured world is not a fertile ground for Catholic
seed," and the reason is "its immorality." That is not ingenious.
It's tripe. Whatever you think of the morals of cultured folk the
reason why Catholicism, with its hell and devils, stinks in their
nostrils is because they are cultured. However, the next writer in
this important Catholic book relieves the gloom. There has been a
great Catholic literary revival in the last ten years. As its
greatest writers he names C. Dawson, C. Hollis, Fr. Darcy, Fr. R.
Knox, K. Adam, J. Maritain, and Sigrid Undset! Apparently he still
could not find one, even on his liberal scale, in America. He had
to sweep all Europe to get these seven second -- or third-raters
together.

     What occurs to one at once on reading these interminable
Catholic dirges is that the Church does really seem to be up
against the world. If American art and literature are so
demoralizing although this wealthy and powerful clerical
organization has been fighting them for more than ten years, what
would they be if there had not been this check on them? Do they or
do they not reflect American life and sentiment? But let us be
serious. Artists give America what it wants -- what the
overwhelming majority of people want. Suspend your League of
Decency and Holy Family and all the other censorships for five
years and see how the public like a freer art and literature.

     In other words, it is a tyranny of a small minority, for even
the great majority of Catholics would still, if they were not
bullied, flock to the cinema if it were just left to ordinary
police-regulation and the recognized civil law. And it is self-
interested tyranny. As I write, Laval is announced to have taken
over power in France from the senile Petain, the man who pledged
his honor that he would never surrender, and he gathers a group of
traitors to France about him. The Press froths with indignation and
vituperation of Laval in particular. But no paper ever mentions
that Laval is a fanatical supporter of the Church and the whole
malodorous group of traitors are Catholics. None of our foreign
correspondents notices that the Black International, which is so
portentously serious about the stretch of leg an actress may show
on the screen, has from the start discreetly protected and is even
very silent about this poisonous swamp of corruption and real 

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               10

                  THE CHURCH DEFIES MODERN LIFE

foulness in France. It would not pay the Church to attack a
foulness that brings suffering upon tens of millions and seems to
all free men diabolical; but it does pay to attack leg-shows and
strip-teasers.

     However, I am always for the kindly and charitable view when
it is possible, so let us suppose that the whole Black
International in America is profoundly sincere when it says that it
finds the sight of that charming little actress -- -- in her undies
on the screen a far more terrible thing than the treachery of
Vichy, the shooting of "hostages," or the systematic raping of
women everywhere by Japanese soldiers and officers. Surely it would
follow only that the clergy must have a moral standard that defies
modern civilization. You may even cut out the comparison and regard
in itself this professed horror of bare legs and jokes about sex.
It is, as the Catholic language about the world and the flesh
implies, a defiance of our age, an insult alike to our intelligence
and our social idealism. It is, when it is sincere, just as much an
outcome of ignorance as is a child's fear of a dragon-fly or an old
colored woman's fear of "haunts."

     There are two main roots of the anti-sex attitude, and both
thrive only on ignorance. The Catholic is, like the Protestant,
bound to appeal to the bible, but the modern mind wants to know how
it got into the bible. It is a fundamental idea of the Pauline
Epistles rather than the Gospels. Indeed, it is, comparatively to
other moral ideas, so infrequently stressed in the Gospels that in
recent year's certain Christian ministers have publicly claimed
that Jesus taught no obligation of chastity. That is, in the mouth
of one who sees a biographical value in the Gospels, an
exaggeration. In fact if we regard Jesus as an Essenian monk who
became convinced that the end of the world was near and went about
warning folk, it is inevitable that he should include chastity
among the major virtues, because the Essenians had, and they had
had the sentiment for more than a century before the beginning of
the present era, so great an aversion to sex that they never
married.

     In any case this dark view of sex was widely spread in the
ancient world before it appeared in the early Christian documents.
Many of my readers will know that I have in earlier works (History
of Morals, etc.) made extensive research into the development of
the feeling and shown that, as is not disputed, it was embodied in
religion's in ancient Egypt (Serapeans, Isisites, etc.), Syria and
Judaea (Essenians, Therapeuts), Babylonia (Esmun, Ishtar), Persia
(Zarathustra), Asia Minor (Diana of Ephesus), and Greece
(Pythagoras, Plato, etc.) centuries before the beginning of the
Christian Era. This vast region had earlier been the great area of
the cult of the Mother-Earth goddess which was intensely phallic
and conducive to what the puritan calls orgies of vice. Upon this
phallic cult broke a religion which represented God as the creator
of light, spirit, and purity (or cleanliness) and therefore
ascribed darkness, matter (the flesh), and the sexual life to a
great evil and tempter of men. As far as we know at present this
antithesis of creative God and creative devil of spirit and flesh, 




                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               11

                  THE CHURCH DEFIES MODERN LIFE

first appeared amongst the Persian and cognate tribes on the hills
overlooking Mesopotamia, and the influence of this Zorastrian 
religion on the whole area (Egypt, Judaea, Greece, etc.) when the
Persians conquered it is not disputed.

     We need not, therefore, go further back and ask what
superstitions of life below the level of civilization -- for
instance, the idea, not uncommon at this level, that there is
something "unclean" as taboo about a woman on account of her
menstruation, etc. -- were gathered up in the Persian theory. It is
enough that the entire world of theologians, philosophers and
moralists as well as ordinary folks now rejects this notion that an
evil spirit created the flesh. And we certainly need not examine
the way in which the early Fathers, maintaining against the Persian
heretics that God had created all things, interpreted an old
Babylonian story which the Jews had inserted in Geneses to mean
that God had made even the flesh pure (in some mysterious sense)
and put a curse on sex only when "man ate the forbidden fruit!"

     So the chief reason why Jesus and Paul, like so many
philosophers (Pythagorean's, Stoics of the religious wing,
Platonists, etc.) and theologies (Essenian, Serapean, Mithranist,
Manichaen, etc.) of the time came to frown upon sex, as a necessary
evil from which the superior person would shrink, is quite
worthless. The second reason, which is rather a pretext invented by
modern theologians and moralists, to cover the weakness of the
original source is just as worthless. It is the socio-historical
argument that sexual license .has led, through enervation, to the,
fall of great civilization's in the past and therefore a religion
which cheeks and combats "vice" is a most valuable auxiliary of the
State. I have elsewhere shown that this is entirely false. No
responsible modern historian tracing the fall of Egypt, Babylon,
Athens, or Rome gives any color to that rhetorical claim. Rome, for
instance, was much more "virtuous" in the 4th Century, just before
its fall, than in the last century of the old era, when it was
entering upon its greatest phase.

     The rottenness of these roots of the old anti-sex attitude is
now so widely recognized that the non-Christian moralists of the
19th Century, who dreaded the argument of the apologist that they
could not sustain the virtue of chastity, fell back upon "the moral
sense" or a man's intuition of natural law. Many moralists are
still in this stage, and "the common moral sense of mankind" is a
pleasant mouthful for the political orator and the editorial
writer. Modern psychology is a science with many conflicting
schools but in none of them is a "moral sense" included in our
mental equipment, and all but a few lingering mystics reject the
very idea of intuition. All men's ideas and attitudes are built-in,
and most professors of the science of ethics today explain moral
ideas on these lines. The only moral law is a law or ideal of
conduct based upon the requirements of social welfare and progress,
and therefore most of the things which the Catholic preacher
denounces as supremely immoral do not come under the moral law at
all.





                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               12

                  THE CHURCH DEFIES MODERN LIFE

     I have had here to confine myself to two or three paragraphs
on a vast subject on which I  have written volumes, but it will 
give a sufficient idea of the ground on which we stand when we say
that this Catholic rhetoric about the world and the flesh is an
appeal to the ignorant, an insolent libel, a chorus of dervishes
which might be amusing if political interests did not give them so
much power. Greater freedom in thinking and speaking about sex
means a new strength, not a new weakness. We have done with the
amiable hypocrisies of our predecessors, whose shows blushed one
night over the fate that is worse than death and the tragedy of Our
Nell and the next night revelled in exhibition's that the modern
police would not permit.

     The very fact that the new attitude is so general -- that in
the words of these preachers (which I quoted), the contamination is
universal -- shows that most men and women, who in earlier
generations transgressed a law which they recognized, now
consciously perceive that there is no such law. The general public
know nothing, of course, of the wide research and close reasoning
on which the new ethic is based; just as the majority of church-
folk know nothing of the logic and reasoning by which priests make
ethical and theological mountains out of the Gospel molehills. But
in the freer atmosphere they use their common sense on the hell-
and-devil view of human nature, and large numbers of them now read
a literature which confirms their common-sense conclusions.
Theologians assailing statesmen with appeals to suppress this
literature are in exactly the same position as the medieval monks
who forced rulers to burn heretics. If it were not for the
political power which the masses of their more ignorant followers
afford them, we should merely have to expose their ignorance and
the real dynamo of their activity.

                           Chapter III

                    SAINTS AND OTHER HOLY MEN

     I have in various works expressed the opinion that a time will
come when the Black International will abandon their campaign
against the world of the flesh and discover that their medieval
Church gave the world a splendid lead in what D'Annunzio called a
"magnificent sensuality" and glorification of the flesh. It would
be but one more revolution in the sacristy. Less than 100 years ago
-- let us say in 1850 -- the Black International in every Catholic
country thundered against democracy. Even in America they had not
yet learned that Paine, Franklin, Jefferson, and Adams had been
suckled at the spiritual breasts of Thomas Aquinas. They were, as
in England, completely indifferent to social questions. But
wherever they had power, from Peru to Italy, and the political
issue was stormily debated, they were intimately leagued with the
brutal forces which had for the second (and, as they thought, last)
time drowned the democrats in their own blood. By the end of the
century they were all democrats, and in America they made the
remarkable discovery, of which priests in other countries do not
yet seem to have heard, that the Church itself had mothered the
democratic ideal. Today, in all Catholic countries, they are again
solidly anti-democratic. Tomorrow ...



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               13

                  THE CHURCH DEFIES MODERN LIFE

     If, as we are all convinced, Russia win's this titanic
struggle and is not defrauded by Britain and America of the
legitimate fruit of victory, the chief voice in the settlement of
Europe, the Church of Rome may find itself compelled to make some
remarkable adjustments in its struggle to retain its wealth and
power. At the moment it hopes, as I have explained in earlier
number's, to maintain its position, the improved position as
compared with what it was from 1920 to 1930, even if the Axis-
Vatican combination is defeated. The whole weight of the Church
will be thrown into the demand that President Roosevelt shall have
a decisive voice in the post-war settlement, and the "Catholic
point of view," which Washington is now so prone to consult, will
be that, as religious influence offers the best security against a
recurrence of lawlessness the Church shall be strengthened in its
new position in Catholic countries (including France and Belgium)
and shall have new rights, in the name of religious freedom, in
Germany and Russia. You may think that a piece of incredible
insolence after the share that the Vatican has had in protecting
the designs of the Axis, but look out for it.

     If, on the other hand, the realistic Russian spirit is
consulted in the settlement, and France, Belgium, Spain, Italy,
Hungary, etc., are allowed to deal with their traitors and
Churches, the Black International will confront the gravest crisis
in its history. It has, in its struggle for survival, changed many
times in the last 30 years, but only superficially or by purely
local adaptations to different conditions. While from 1900 to 1914
the American bishops and priests were, as part of their forward
movement, boisterously assuring the public that the Church was
broad-minded and tolerant and a good neighbor to other Churches,
Rome itself three times (as I told) officially published, in Latin,
its medieval Canon Law with all its superbly intolerant and
truculent claims. When, from 1920 to 1940, these American priests
and bishops were putting forward their extraordinary proofs of the
Church's affinity with the modern ideals of freedom and democracy
the Vatican was working on the anti-democratic line which
culminated in its alliance with the Axis powers. The Church had not
changed a single principle. It still boasted that, while all other
Churches shed old dogmas and gave new liberties, it was still
Immutable Rome.

     That it must sooner or later change or perish will be doubted
only by a man who despairs of the issue of the present conflict and
imagines that the world may be returning to a new Dark Age, but it
will seem to many quixotic to suggest that it might drop its
furious campaign against the world, the flesh, and the devil. We
must remember that the first dogmas to be jettisoned by a Church in
time of danger are those which most affront the moral sentiment,
and it is humorous to reflect that while the doctrine of hell did
not disturb the minds of even educated persons during the long ages
of faith it is highly repugnant in this age which the preachers
describe as almost devoid of moral sense. Less than 100 years ago
that doctrine was just as vital in the teaching of the Church of
England and its American offshoot as it now is in the Church of
Rome. Today it is at the most optional and was very clearly
recommended for rejection at the Lambeth Conference; and there was
no exodus from the Church. And if it be said that it is a long step

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               14


                  THE CHURCH DEFIES MODERN LIFE

from rejecting belief in hell and the devil to rejecting the sexual
taboo, consider what happened at the Conference of the American
Protestant Episcopal Church in 1922, the speeches at which are
published in a volume with the title 'The Influence of the Church
on Modem Problems.'

     The problem set for the first sitting was: "What are our young
people seeking in their apparent revolt from the moral standards of
an earlier day?" The word "apparent" may seem very ecclesiastical,
though the first two speakers supported it. The third and last was
a clergyman of some distinction who certainly knew Christian youth,
and he must have made their hair stand on end. Morals means
customs, he said cheerfully, and the moral code is to a large
extent conventional or customary. The young see this and want "a
rationale of morals"; and, he added, they are "having considerable
difficulty in finding one." There is a legitimate "new ethic," and
in the light of it "ours is for the most part an irreligious but
moral generation." The Church in educating them had made too much
fuss about their bodies, and we must "revaluate our moral
standards." For this, he said, we find encouragement in the
Gospels. Jesus was "quite out of sympathy with the current legalism
in regard to impurity." (Is it necessary to remind you that the
usual clerical plea is that Jesus went beyond all contemporaries in
the severity of his sex-teaching?) Did he not eat with sinners and
make a pal of Mary Magdalene? His "sole recorded utterance about
impurity" was that a man who looked with desire at a pretty girl
committed adultery, and by this he meant to "reduce to absurdity
the violent treatment of tactual impurity." (Nice phrase, that). In
short, the speaker said, "I find no evidence in Jesus's teaching of
any special value put by him on chastity as a thing in itself" or
any "merely negative virtues, All we need do is to induce the young
not to "fill their lives with carnal indulgences" by teaching them
alternatives. "Our decency is deadly dull" and they want "jollier
ways." So let us join the young in burying Mrs. Grundy "with
rejoicing" and not "keep trundling about her increasingly
unpleasant corpse,"

     Thus (pp. 22-28) spoke the much respected President of St.
Stephen's College, Dr. B.I. Bell. No earthquake followed, as far as
I can discover Bell was not decapitated or sent to a concentration-
camp. The bishops of the Protestant Episcopal Church turned instead
upon my old friend W. Montgomery Brown and expelled him from their
midst for saying that the only redemption the world needed was from
poverty and war.

     Which reminds me of a fact that will amuse most of my readers.
All those learned books which Brown flung at the heads of his
episcopal judges from 1930 to 1936, including the two books for
children and the famous address to the Parliament of Religions in
1933, were written by me. I was, secretly, Bill's "literary
secretary." As long as he was a good Atheist and Materialist I did
not mind how many ecclesiastical titles he bought. It was, he often
told me, all to be revealed in his will and a trust established to
enable me to carry on the good work in my own name. But Bill was
too idealistic to control money, and he died owing me a lot and
leaving me without documents to secure it. In spite of his
sentimental desire to keep an ecclesiastical status, which he never


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               15

                  THE CHURCH DEFIES MODERN LIFE

attempted to explain to me though he relied on me in his fight for
ten years, Bill was a man of splendid character, fearless and
incorruptible, passionately eager for justice to the workers,
defective only in that his complete sense of honor made him too
trustful of others. I have in my long tramps through life met a
hundred such men and women and known hundreds of others from their
books and letters, and they all belonged essentially to that
"world" which Rome shudderingly defies and calumniates.

     In other words, it is not only in its largely hypocritical
stress on sexual purity but in its general standard of character
that the Church defies modern thought and life. This is inevitable.
The requirements of the Black International are ruinous to the kind
of character, the straight, realistic, uncompromising character,
that the modern world esteems and requires. I suppose that Michael
Williams would be urged upon us by American Catholics as a fine
type of lay personality not perverted by the needs of the clerical
profession, yet I find his chief book, 'Catholicism and the Modern
Mind' (1928) a dreary tissue of sophistry and looseness in
statements of fact.

     He tell's As a fact the story of Benedict XV and Mussolini.
The Catholic legend is that during the last war, when the Papacy
handled a fund for relieving the relatives of soldiers, the Pope
one day noticed that the name of Signora Mussolini and her family
was struck off the list. He was told that the lady's son -- now the
great Duce -- was an enemy of the Church, but he insisted that the
name be put back, and Mussolini, hearing of the occurrence, was
deeply moved and got "a new view of the Catholic Church." I do not
know whether Catholic editors generally imagine that Popes have
leisure to scrutinize lists of obscure villagers far away from
Rome, and I very much doubt if Mussolini would admit that his
family depended on charity, but if Williams does not know that
Mussolini continued for two years after the war -- until he got a
rich bribe -- to attack the Vatican bitterly and opprobriously he
is strangely ill-informed for a man in his position. He includes in
the book a most generous eulogy of Bryan just after his death.
Williams was reporting the trial in Dayton, and it is difficult to
believe that he was not aware that, as Clarence Darrow told me,
Bryan brought about his death by gluttony and had for years been
notorious for gluttonous practices such as provoking a vomit to
make room for more. It is not much better to find Williams solemnly
endorsing the claim that Aquinas, Bellarmine, and Suarez inspired
the modem ideals of freedom and democracy, and that the Catholics
of Maryland taught America religious tolerance. It is a platitude
of American history that the Catholics were in a minority in
Maryland and used their power to get toleration for themselves.
Williams endorses falsehoods and fallacies as glibly as any Jesuit.

     On the other hand take Laval. In the last few days I have read
a score of British and American characterizations of this repulsive
adventurer. All agree that apart from the worst of The German and
Italian leaders, he is the most sordid type of man thrown up to the
surface in this churning up of the mud of European life, but not a
single one of the writers mentions that he is a Catholic and in
good odor at the Vatican. No one recalls as I did in No. 7 (First
Series, p. 26), that on June 9, 1935, Laval, wearing the decoration


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               16

                  THE CHURCH DEFIES MODERN LIFE

of the Papal Order of Pius IX, visited the pole in the Vatican,
bearing rich presents, and presented his daughter, to whom, as a
good Catholic, the Pope gave a gold and coral rosary. To the
Vatican he was the most esteemed Catholic in France, and he became
a cordial friend of the present Pope. The Papal newspaper, the
Osservatore, gave a glowing account -- you may read an abridged
translation of it in Keesing -- of the Pious interview, and a
member of British and American papers, not foreseeing the ghastly
future and ignoring the evil reputation that Laval already had in
France, reported it with respect.

     I cannot ascertain the opinions of every man in this bunch of
Vichy traitors to civilization who have fouled the honor of France
but in the days when the Allies still had a pathetic trust that
they would resist Hitler the papers ingenuously told how Petain,
Weygand, and other leaders are devout Catholics. It is a Catholic
group, combining docility to the Vatican with private greed for
wealth and power of the most sordid type. But the press would
rather leave the whole miserable business inexplicable than offend
Catholics by telling the truth about it. Once more the influence of
the Black International has the public fooled even on vital
questions of the hour. And, as we have seen, it is not a question
of France only. Catholics -- Leopold of Belgium and the ministers
who cling to him, Franco and his cut-throats in Spain, Salazar in
Portugal, Tizzo in Slovakia, Henlein in Sudetenland, Seyss-Inquart
in Austria and Holland, De Valera in Eire, etc. -- head the list of
the men who have betrayed humanity in its gravest crisis, just as
the Atheists of Russia head the list of those who sacrifice and die
for it. How have your leading Catholics, cleric and lay, in America
stood in this real struggle of good and evil? How do they still
stand in Quebec? I can assure you that in Great Britain not a
single Catholic, cleric or lay, stood out in the ranks of the
fighters for civilization.

     It is a mockery to find the Church of Rome boasting of its
richness in "saints" when, at a time of supreme need of character
and virility, it pushes into positions of power only muddle-headed
weaklings like Leopold and Petain or an unscrupulous blackguard
like Laval. From Cape Cod to San Diego the Black International is
bemusing its children, of all ages, with a legend of the peculiar
"holiness" of their Church. No other religion in the world, they
say, can show such a list of men and women of fine character. I
illustrated the grossly fraudulent nature of this list by a few
words on the "Holy Fathers" in the first booklet of this series,
and have shown elsewhere (Little Blue Book, 1107) that saints and
martyrs were fabricated by the thousands for the first half of the
story of the Roman Church. But what standard of character for the
modern world is there in the overwhelming majority of those who
were really historical? They were just men and women who took
seriously the theory that for every pleasure you sacrificed during
a few decades of life you won a hundred times as much during a
whole eternity. That is not character. It is trade. Yet so poor is
the real moral influence of the Church that it hardly persuades any
of its followers in modern times to attain that degree of
commercial logic. The one or two men and women who today are.
selected (out of hundreds of millions) every year or so for
canonization are really chosen for diplomatic reasons -- to please 
particular countries -- and to bring a modest shower of gold, to
Rome.
                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               17

                  THE CHURCH DEFIES MODERN LIFE

     Where, moreover, Catholics do make strained efforts to rise,
toward the level of these "saints" they generally succeed in
contracting the vices -- hard intolerance and pious
unscrupulousness -- of the fanatical saints rather than the virtues
of the more human. They are apt to be sour, cruel, unjust,
slanderous, and convinced that the end, if it is the good of the
Church, justifies the means. They lose the sense of citizenship
whenever the clergy urge them to use their voting power in the
interest of the Church. Everybody will know Catholics who have not
these vices. No one pretends that all of them are puritans and
bigots of the sourer type. But would you say that the geniality and
Straightforwardness of the Catholics you admire is a result of
their faith and the sourness and intolerance of others is not a
result of Catholic teaching? Would you say that this dally
literature of theirs which describes the whole non-catholic world
as a contamination, this literature which describes critics of the
Church as dishonest and malignant, has no ill effect on their
general character?

     The medieval character of their ethics gives them a rigidity
of mind that very largely unfits them for that censorship of other
people's lives which they always claim. Take their matter of
chastity, celibate or married, which they almost make identical
with "morals." I referred on an earlier page to the importance of
the sex hormones, the secretions of sex and some other ductless
glands, which differ in different individuals just as the
secretions of the liver or the pancreas do and cause the varieties
which we call "strong passions" or "coldness" and every stage
between the two extremes. But no Catholic moralist ever takes this
elementary truth of physiology into account. Then have a wooden
theory that everybody has a "free will," and the nymphomaniac is
just a "vile woman" who will not control her passions while the
spinster or nun who shrinks from men because she has none or a very
feeble amount of the sexual hormones in her veins is a very
superior or virtuous woman. It is, the Catholic thinks, cynical,
materialistic, degrading to say such things. Scientific works which
prove and explain them ought to be suppressed.

     If it were not for the suffocating influence which the Black
International has won over the press, literature, radio, schools,
etc., what they call the "world" would laugh in their faces. They
belong, like our astrologers and palmists, to the Middle Ages; at
least their theories do, for there was far more sexual freedom in
practice in the Middle Ages than there is today. How long the world
will tolerate these dervishes dictating the dresses of girls on the
stage or screen -- and probably sneaking in with scarves over their
collars to see the pictures they could not suppress -- is a matter
of astonishment to us older men. We want neighbors who are genial,
truthful, straightforward. We want public men who are virile,
strictly honest, broad-minded. We do not care two pins about their
amorous adventures. We live in a world in which for various reasons
a very large body of women will never marry; we are passing into a
world of mourning in which millions of girls and women of every
country will not be able to marry. To forbid them normal life
because some 2,500 years ago somebody started the idea that the
devil made the flesh and Paul made a religion of it is as cruel as
it is unintelligent. And to say that we folk who have patiently 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               18

                  THE CHURCH DEFIES MODERN LIFE

traced this ancient ethic to its roots and severely checked its
action in history are to be counted a danger to civilization, while
these priests who nearly, succeeded in selling civilization for
thirty pieces of silver are to be considered its custodians, is
simply ludicrous. In a sense all this fury about the world reminds
us of Don Quixote tilting at windmills, but the Black International
is not a crack-brained knight with a simple-minded Servant. It is
an International army of, in one costume or other, a million men
and women, and the horror that grips the world is in part its
movement.

                           Chapter IV

                    WHY PRIESTS DO NOT MARRY

     The vow of chastity of priests, monks, and nuns is one of the
most absurd complications into which this attempt to govern modern
life by an ancient superstition leads the Roman Church. Both in the
age when, in the early Church, the Fathers decided that celibacy
was the ideal life for the clergy and in the age (the 11th Century)
when a brood of fanatics finally imposed it upon the clergy the
reason alleged for it was simple. There was something, not exactly
revolting (if you were married) but certainly very indelicate and
contaminating, in all sexual intercourse. A really holy person must
abstain from it. It was not true that, as the heretics said, the
devil had made the body, yet there certainly was something unclean
about its reproductive department, and in a rigmarole of doctrinal
reasoning the Fathers connected it once more with the devil by
saying that God had created the body clean but Adam had brought
about a mysterious change by yielding to the tempter.

     It is quite impossible for priests to give this explanation to
their men and women followers today. In moral theology casuists try
to work out just what, of a sexual nature, is forbidden even to
married folk. It is an amusing chapter but I dare not give
illustrations. These chapters of Catholic moral theology on sex
would, if he could read them, make an Irish policeman's hair stand
on end. Practically, sodomy apart, married Catholics have a free
run. Herodotus says that the ancient Babylonians, whom modern
Catholics regard as so very wicked, compelled a married pair after
intercourse to get up and, in modern language, say their prayers.
Your Irish, Polish, and Italian married folk on the contrary. ...
No. I must give it up. But believe me that they are not told any
longer that there is anything in any way repellent about the sex-
organs or intercourse once you have the priestly license. At the
most there is sometimes an attempt to represent that the voluntary
virgin is in some sense superior on account of her sacrifice; but
girls are, I understand, rather skeptical about claims of voluntary
spinsterhood.

     The reasons which the Church gives today for keeping its
clergy in this unnatural condition are not taken very seriously. It
wants them to be free from the entanglements and burdens of married
life so that they may devote themselves strictly to their arduous
duties; which is not very convincing when we reflect that men who
work 40 to 50 hours a week very much prefer to have the
entanglement of marriage whereas the average priest scarcely hits
ten or fifteen hours a week of not very exacting work. A more 

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               19

                  THE CHURCH DEFIES MODERN LIFE

serious reason is military discipline. Clerical authorities have a
more effective control of what we may call the private soldiers of
the Black International army if they have no families: but that is
not the kind of reason that they can give to the laity or the world
at large. Catholic women, in fact, do not want any reason, and, as
there are twice as, many women as men in the only congregations
that expect any reasons for anything from the Church -- those with
more money and more education -- it is not expedient to say
anything about celibacy. You never hear a sermon on it. The women
would not have the fluttering regard for their priests which they
have if there were a wife looking on or in the background, and they
could hardly avoid an uneasy feeling at times that their
picturesque confessions might not in spite of the "seal of
confession," slip out at night when the married priest sipped his
final highball at night by the fire with his wife. Experience gives
women a rather cynical view of things one hears "in confidence."

     None of these reasons, in any case, explains the celibacy of
monks, nuns, and religious brothers, and for this there is no
serious reason except the historic plea that virginity is superior
to non-virginity because there is something animal and low about
sex-indulgence even with a license. You might roundly say that the
Church will not abandon the celibacy of its priests, monks, and
nuns, though in all ages many sincere bishops have urged it to do
so, because this is an important part of the uniqueness amongst
religious bodies of which it is so proud. No other Church, except
the corrupted Buddhism of Eastern Asia, can get hordes of men and
women to make the great sacrifice. That is true, but there is
uniqueness in vice as well as virtue, in stupidity as well as
wisdom, and the Church can only boast of the voluntary virginity of
its vast clerical and monastic army if abstention from sex-
indulgence gives a man or woman a superior moral condition.

     So we come back always to the original root of all this morbid
glorification of virginity and dark view of sex. The early Church
was, as everybody knows, cradled in a mighty struggle of those who
called themselves orthodox Christians and those whom they called
Gnostic heretics. This cradle, as I call it, was the line of cities
round the eastern end of the Mediterranean -- Judaea had really
little to do with the origin of Christianity as a new religion --
and the whole region was steeped in the new ascetic mysticism which
Persian influence had engendered, Egyptians, Jews, Syrians, and
Greeks as well as Persians all having different versions of it.
Common to almost all of them was the belief that the devil had
created matter, and that the quintessence of its diabolism, so to
say, was found in the organs of generation. There are modern
writers who hold that what came to be called Christianity was at
first just a local variation of this widespread Gnosticism. It
seems to me more probable that the Gnosties fastened upon the story
of Jesus which was then spreading and represented him as a splendid
confirmation of their creed (already a century or two old); a
Demigod or semi-God sent by the Father of Light and Spirit to lead
men in the fight against the world, the flesh, and the devil.

     However that may be, not even Catholics dispute that it was a
general tenet of the Gnostic leaders that the flesh, especially in
its sex-part -- one often wonders whether the nearness of the Sex 
organ to the excretory organs had not a lot to do with the odium it

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               20

                  THE CHURCH DEFIES MODERN LIFE

incurred amongst these mystics -- was so thoroughly evil that even
a marriage-license did not remove the unpleasantness, The Catholic
leaders or Fathers retorted that God created man, body and soul,
and, though the body was fouled by the sin of Adam and Eve, God
provided for the continuation of the race by instituting marriage
for the less holy crowd who could not live up to the strain of
virginity. As this is not in the least disputed I need not quote.
Contemporary Greeks of inquiring mind must have had a pleasant time
watching these rival Christians cracking each other's skulls as
they did, over the question. All the more influential of the early
Fathers -- Irenaeus, Polycarp, Athenagoras, Clement, etc. -- took
this view that marriage (Athenagoras called it "a specious
adultery") was just a concession to weaklings and that sex stank in
the nostrils of holy people. The most learned Christian of the age,
Origen, nicknamed Chaleenteros ("Brass-Guts"), castrated himself to
get rid of the beastly obsession.

     The Roman Church, as I have earlier explained, humanized its
attitude when it found that the Romans continued to despise the
obscure little conventicle across the river. Irenaeus, who tells us
all about the Gnostics, says that they held that. "marriage and
generation are from Satan" and "marriage is corruption and
fornication." This did not suit the ladies of Rome -- the men of
higher class never had anything to do with the Church until they
were compelled by law -- and the Popes made marriage easier for
them than Roman law did and in addition promised them absolution
from all their adulteries and abortions (the contemporary Bishop
Hippolytus tells us). But the great leaders of the Church even in
the west, the men, whose writings were to rule the belief of the
Middle Ages, persisted in the disdain of sex. Tertullian poured
fierce scorn on the Popes for apostitizina from the true Christian
doctrine. Jerome talked to his school of virgin-pupils as if sex
were very much more unpleasant than defalcation -- he uses a much
broader word than that -- and Augustine in his later years went to
weird extremes. In his treatise 'On Conjugal Love' (never
translated, of course) he says that the sex-pleasure is evil and
must not be desired or enjoyed as such even by married folk. They
just dispassionately have, to keep the race going. Even Solomon and
the Hebrew patriarchs did not seek pleasure, he says, but had so
many wives from a pure sense of duty. And since the maintenance of
the race is now assured, superior men and women, will cut out sex
altogether. He even goes so far as to admit that on this view of
marriage a man who finds his wife barren may take a concubine in
addition (e. XV): an opinion never mentioned by Christian writers
on Augustine. He was so obsessed with this view of marriage and sex
-- if it were not in Augustine a modern Catholic writer would call
it soulless, mechanical, and materialistic -- that he wrote book
after book (On Holy Virginity, On the Blessedness of Widowhood, On
Marriage and Concupiscence, etc.) to enforce it.

     It is agreed that Augustine's works were the Bible of the
Middle Ages, but the phrase is very misleading. Not one of the
laity in a hundred thousand ever read them or took the least notice
of his theory; and probably not one priest or monk in ten thousand
shared his contempt of sex. As far as we have any positive
indications of general behavior there never was another lengthy
period with such sexual freedom -- in the first part (to about 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               21

                  THE CHURCH DEFIES MODERN LIFE

1050) such sheer animalism -- as the eleven or twelve centuries
that followed the triumph of the Roman Church. The only practical
issue of the teaching of the Fathers was that bishops who sincerely
shared it tried to get marriage forbidden to the priests; and in so
far as they were successful they brought upon the world a flood of
vice of a new type -- sex-indulgence not merely without license but
in spite of solemn vows to avoid It. In earlier works (History of
the Roman Church, History of Morals, etc.) I have shown that Lea's
History of Sacerdotal Celibacy gives much material, but there is
more in French works like Chavard's 'Le celibat, le pretree et la
femme' (1894).

     On the other hand the story of the development of the law or
custom of sacerdotal celibacy is, as usual, falsely told by
Catholic writers; one of whom seems to have got the job of writing
the article on it in the new and painfully pro-Catholic
Encyclopedia Americana. The best generally available article is
that in the Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics. Attempts to impose
the law were local, rare, and soon obliterated. The 'Decretum
Gratiani,' the basic document of Canon Law, names ten Popes of the
first few centuries who were sons of bishops and says that there
were "a great number of others" (Chavard). The St. Patrick of whom
Irish priests talk so much, was the son of a Roman deacon who was
the son of a priest. The great Council of Nicaea turned down the
proposal to pass a law of celibacy, and it is merely misleading to
quote a provincial council that passed a law once in a century for
its own region. By the year 1000, Prof. Crogs moderately says,
priests were still commonly married and where they were forbidden
there was "more or less flagrant concubinage" and other evils.
Bishops, of course, made money out of the situation by making a
priest pay for permission to have a woman in his house. Cornelius
Agrippa tells us that a bishop of the 11th Century levied a
concubine-tax on 11,000 priests. When it was pointed out to him
that they did not all want concubines he said: "Let them pay
whether they want one or not -- then they can please themselves."

     There is nothing in the history of religion remotely like the
general license of Catholic priests, monks, and nuns from the 4th
Century to the 16th. In Catholic circles all this is called "a few
irregularities, and the faithful are uplifted with a charming
account of the way in which their unique Church inspired millions
to forswear the most intense pleasure in life (on the promise of
1,000 percent interest in the next life) while no other branch of
the Christian Church could inspire any. It certainly was unique --
in a consecrated vice which makes the practice of the sacred
prostitute's of ancient religions look white in comparison. But for
all that I must refer to my larger books.

     With these 800 years of clerical and monastic vice before
their eyes -- for although history was then rudimentary, every
saint whom they read, from Jerome, Augustine, and Benedict onward,
testified to it -- the monks who captured the Papacy in the 12th
Century met out to impose a universal law of chastity. Some day,
when professors are permitted to write in freedom, one of them may
write a very interesting work on the influence of men and women
with feeble or no sexual hormones on the development of moral
idealism. Some years ago a well-known British Catholic apologist 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               22

                  THE CHURCH DEFIES MODERN LIFE

hinted, writing for Catholics, that I had descended to some vague
but awful depth which he had not expected even of me. What had I
done? Merely suggested that Hildebrand, Damiani, and Anselmo of
Lucca, the monks of the Papal Court who led the fight against the
marriage of priests, were probably impotent: a condition which, if
they enjoyed it, would have filled them with pride. Anyhow it did
not lower their fighting qualities. The language which Cardinal
Damiani uses in his extant sermons provide an outfit for a New York
stevedore. They led imperial troops and, the scum of the Italian
cities (to whom they promised the loot of married priests' houses)
and after years of struggle imposed celibacy on all priests and
monks (some of whom were still married).

     There followed four centuries of worse vice than ever, as a
very high proportion of the clergy had hitherto been married. The
state of Christendom was such that several Church Councils
seriously considered the question of revoking the law -- see
Coulter's excellent article in the Encyclopedia Britannica -- but
Rome never abandons a policy that it considers to its advantage
because it causes vice or suffering. At the Council of Trent, when
half of Europe was now full of heretics scornfully describing the
corruption of the Church, another attempt was made to revoke the
law. Bishops representing the Emperor described in the darkest
colors the state of the Church and demanded the marriage of priests
and the suppression of monastic bodies. Rome, still corrupt,
opposed the reform, and Trent turned what had hitherto been only a
matter of discipline into a dogma. It pronounced "anathema" on any
who should ever again oppose celibacy. In recent times, in spite of
this, bodies of priests in various countries have raised the
question again. A French priest, Jules Claraz, gives an account of
these in his Manage des pretress and his book was at once put on
the Index. Catholics were to be protected in their illusion that
their priests joyously and loyally sustain the vow.

     Naturally large numbers of Catholics, especially men, have
their doubts. A friend of mine visiting relatives in the Rhine
Province while the trials of monks for sodomy were revealing to
Germany the amazing corruption of the Church asked several who
lived near the infected monasteries what they thought of the
revelation. "We always had some suspicion of it" they said. But
again the Black International took every precaution to keep the
truth about their "holy men" out of the press. Haldeman-Julius was
the one publisher in Britain or America who let me tell that truth,
Five years after the first series of trials, in which 250 monks
(religious brothers) were brought up in the courts of Catholic
cities and put through ordinary legal procedure that the Catholics
of the provinces fully respected, a widely-read novel on German
life said that the Nazis brought against the monks foul charges "In
support of which they had never adduced any evidence." By that time
thousands of witnesses had been examined in the open courts of
Catholic Bonn, Cologne, Coblentz, and Munich -- not in Nazi courts
-- and several thousand priests and monks who had taken the vow of
virginity were in jail for sodomy or corruption of the. young
Catholics pleaded that the proportion of priests was small.
Naturally, simple fornication is not an offense in German law and
no priest was arrested for it.



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               23

                  THE CHURCH DEFIES MODERN LIFE

     I have in an earlier number given ground to believe that the
majority of priests today violate their vow. In Catholic countries
this notoriously is the situation. See the picture of Catholic life
by a man who lives in a solidly Catholic country which I quoted in
No. 14 of this series. Here I speak of America, and on the basis of
conversations with ex-priests in America. What else would any
sensible man expect? Recruits for the priesthood are usually
secured at the age of 13 to 15. They have, as a rule, the habits of
youths at that age, but a renunciation of marriage is still to them
a vague and not intimidating prospect. Its irksome features are
outweighed by what they have been taught to regard as the high
prestige of the priest's position. They are for the most part sons
of working-class or lower middle-class parents, preferably of
Italian, Polish, Irish, or German blood, and to them ordination
means elevation to a social rank of which, unless they became
priests, they have no hope.

     I am not here generalizing from a personal experience, though
my parents belonged to the lower middle-class. But I was not
sexually developed until I was 26, and the successive vows of
chastity I ruled off as candidate for the monastery and the
priesthood, meant nothing to me. Such freaks as I are rare, but,
though the overwhelming majority of candidates are sexually mature
at the first vows, they are too young to realize what the life-
sacrifice means and are dazed by the prospect of the easy,
comfortable, and privileged lift of the priest. A Catholic would
explain to you that Rome is always willing to consider a request
for an annulment of the vow in its first form. Yes, Rome, not the
local bishop. It is made more intimidating by this need to appeal
to the Vatican; and, especially, it requires a moral courage that
very few youths and girls possess to cone back to a Catholic home
and friends, after taking the vow of a cleric or a nun, and meet
the almost contemptuous glances from all sides and the bitter
disappointment of one's family.

     Certainly this celibacy of the clergy is unique to the Roman
Church. No other would tolerate an institution that is so cruel to
the loyal, so productive of hypocrisy in the disloyal. It is part
of the hard, calculating, unscrupulous attitude of a body of men
who believe that the end justifies the mean's. It makes the Roman
Church a fit ally for the Axis powers.

                            Chapter V

              MELODRAMA ABOUT THE WORLD, THE FLESH,

                          AND THE DEVIL

     It seems at first sight an amazing thing to suggest that a
Church which boasts that it has more hundreds of millions of
members in this age of science, than any other religion in the
world should embody in its teachings, indeed force upon our
attention, ideas which were elucabrated by shaggy dervishes
speculating on life on the Persian hills 2,500 or more years ago.
It becomes bewildering when we find this Church in one breath
defying the world in which (or on which) it lives as something
alien and contaminating and in the next breath boasting that its 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               24

                  THE CHURCH DEFIES MODERN LIFE

principles are in perfect harmony with those of the most advanced
democracy of the age. I have explained a good deal of the paradox.
The American apologist says that what his Church agree's with, what
it has in fact itself inspired, is the fundamental American
principle of freedom and democracy, and what it defies and attacks
is its godlessness (as a state) and its paganism in art and morals.
But when you press these very logical professors for definitions
you find them quoting Papal declarations that "freedom" must be
understood in the "Catholic sense," which means a galling tyranny,
and democracy means, in a Catholic mouth and in the Papal
Encyclical of 1931, the kind of rule we see in Italy, Spain,
Portugal, and Vichy France. As to those apologists who add that in
religious toleration we have another point of agreement or of
American learning from Catholicism, I have quoted their most
authoritative writers brazenly admitting that the Church is and
must be "intolerant" and could have quoted as many more as you
wish. But as I gave the text of the Church Law, officially
published in Rome, on the complete refusal of the rights to other
Churches, the dogmatic rejection of the right of "freedom of
conscience" (or to follow your reasoned convictions in regard to
religion), and the "right and duty" of the Church to put seceders
from its ranks to death, there is no need to say more.

     Every attempt of these apologists to clear their Church of a
charge of hard and selfish arrogance in these respects brings us
back to the original paradox: the Church is defying the modern
world on the grounds of ancient Asiatic superstitions. It is a
sheer lie that its principles are in harmony with the principles
and ideals of America; it is a hypocritical pretense that the
Church contributes so effectively to the social welfare that on
this ground alone it deserves the very privileged and insolent
position it has usurped in the country. When the apologists are
writing for Catholics they betray themselves. The whole of the
arrogance, insolence, intrigue, unscrupulousness, deception, and
ambition for wealth and power of the Church, of which in these
books we have seen so much, are ingenuously explained on the ground
that the supreme consideration in men's affairs is eternal
salvation, that the Roman Church is the only appointed Ark of
Salvation,. and that in all its usurpations and claims it is
performing this work by fighting the devil, the world, and the
flesh. And this means that it builds upon a theory which in its
root takes us back to a semi-civilized small nation (the Persians
before Cyrus) whose ideas the Greeks and Romans despised. It defies
all our science, all our common sense, all our hard-won liberties
in the name of this wild vagary of the imagination in an age of
profound ignorance. Let me give two further illustrations from
current Catholic literature.

     The first is from a piece of British literature but it is so
important from the Catholic viewpoint that it is worth considering.
As one part of their attempt to force their way into the cultural
swim, British Catholics began some years ago to hold a Summer
School under the shadow of the venerable University of Cambridge.
In the holiday sessions of 1931 the subject was human nature, and
the papers read are published with the title Man (1932). The big
guns were trundled along from all the chief Catholic colleges in 



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               25

                  THE CHURCH DEFIES MODERN LIFE

England, so you are not reading vapid and irresponsible jibes at
modern thought like W.D. Nutting's 'How Firm A Foundation?' (1939).
Yet the whole book is a flat defiance of modern scholarship in the
name of ancient superstitions as served up in Geneses.

     Dr. T.E. Flynn deals with the evolution of man. He shows that
all Catholics are compelled to believe that the whole human race
descends from Adam and that Eve was made out of Adam. You may be
relieved to know that the Church does not insist on the rib, and
that, while it does insist that God made Adam out of earth or dust
or something, it is not obligatory to believe that, as it is put,
God shaped Adam out of a lump of clay and breathed life into it;
but the evolution, even of the body, is out of the question for a
Catholic (p. 160). Others of the learned Catholic professors agreed
and carried on the story through the Garden of Eden, the Fall,
Original Sin, and Redemption. The dogmas based upon this ancient
Asiatic series of folk-stories are, the writers say, binding upon
every Catholic today just as they were formulated by the Council of
Trent.

     The second book, 'The Two Kingdoms' (1931), is a series of
essays by six well-known British priests with -- note this -- a
very cordial letter of introduction by the late Cardinal Bourne,
assuring you that it is quite sound Catholicism. The "two kingdoms"
are, of course, the Kingdom (or City) of God and the Kingdom of
Man, as expounded in Augustine's 'City of God,' the centenary of
whose death has inspired the volume. And the burden of it is that
the Catholic holds fast to that dreary gospel of Augustine's senile
years. What the authors do not seem to know is that they are
holding fast, not merely to ideas put forward by an old man in the
days when Roman culture was in complete decay but the ideas,
slightly Christianized, of the Persian Avesta.

     Our world, it seems, is gathering round two poles,
"Catholicism and Antichrist." If that does not raise a laugh see
your doctor. The world of the blackguards of Vichy, Italy, Spain,
Hungary, and Slovakia to "Catholicism," the pole of light and
virtue; at the pole of darkness and vice, Antichrist, you have
their opponents. Naturally, the priest-writers do not see this. The
world, they say, has been comprehensively debauched by the
Freemasons. In proof of this they offer us forged documents like
Father Coughlin's 'Protocols,' and you learn how these agents of
the devil write to each other. "It is a corruption en masse that we
have undertaken ... the corruption which ought, one day, to enable
us to put the Church in her tomb" (p. 118). This horrible plot of
Blum, Azana, Reynaud, etc. is carried out by "the debauching of
popular intelligence by manipulated news, lying catch words, and
sordid pleasures" (chiefly the cinema). All this is a preparation
for the reign of Antichrist and the end of the world. The writers
-- remember, not a bunch of Georgia Baptists "or Nevada Adventists
but Catholic priests of authority -- have carefully studied
'Revelation,' the Jewish-Gnostic boiling hash of Persian ideals and
hatred of Romans. They see the "signs of the second coming of
Christ multiplying." Hitler? Japan? No, no; this was in 1931. "In
the mind of the Church Antichrist, the final Antichrist, will be a
man, and we may well conclude that he will be the representative of
a great world-movement of universal peace and material prosperity" 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               26

                  THE CHURCH DEFIES MODERN LIFE

(194). Queer dress for an Antichrist. For a moment I had a wild
idea that they meant either me or Huldeman-Julius, but the next
page disillusioned me. The end is to be preceded -- see the Good
Book -- by the spread of a universal false religion, and here is
the cream of it:

          Is it an improbable conjecture that humanistic
     philosophy, biology, psychology, and sociology, with the aid
     of false history and the deceptive marvels of Spiritism, may
     supply this, and then Antichrist as the necessary concrete
     object of worship? (195).

     Nuts, you say: turn to something serious. But I have already
explained that these priests are important enough and their ideas
are sound enough from the Catholic angle to get a warm letter of
introduction from Cardinal Bourne, head of the Roman Church in
England and considered one of its leading scholars.

     The Greeks had a word for this thing. But make no mistake
about it. This is, apart from the hints that the end of the world
is near, just the ordinary Catholic attitude. The Antichrist idea
would probably today be put in reserve. It is sound Catholic
doctrine that some time or other, instead of this nonsense that
astronomers talk about a failure of the sun in 200,000,000 years or
so, the world will be all corrupted and the poor Church hard
pressed, and then Christ will come from the clouds and knock
Antichrist into a cocked hat. But from the Catholic angle the world
has mightily improved in the last ten years, and the evil reign has
been put off for, perhaps -- if we trust Adolf's intuition -- a
thousand years. Catholic power and its blessings -- joy, peace and
prosperity -- spread from land to land (Italy, Spain -- but you
know the list), and when Hitler has wiped the floor of Europe with
the Russians and Japan has cleared Americans and British out of
Asia the Pope will get the reward of his alliance.

     Seriously, this melodramatic stuff is Catholicism. The system
of ideas and practices as a whole we will examine in the next book,
but one of the most important factors in the Church's remarkable
hold on some 100,000,000 folk (omitting children and savages) is
the world, the flesh, and the devil -- though the three-in-one
means a legion of devils that multiplies by spontaneous as the race
multiplies -- are out for their immortal souls, and the Church
alone can effectively foil them. Hence the morbid emphasis on sex.
Ahriman -- in good Christian, Satan -- may not have created the
flesh but he has sort of monopolized or annexed it. He invented the
motion-picture and the photo-electric cell, he inspired touch-
dances and strip-teases and those glossy pictures you see in the
advertisement columns, until the chaste and austere Knights of
Columbus and knaves of Tammany rushed to the rescue of American
civilization. He was getting advertisements of his literature into
respectable American papers until the Holy Family and the Children
of Mary and the League of Kindergarten Pupils were used to send the
editors letters reminding them that this is a free country and
there are more ways than one of knocking an editor on the head.





                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               27

                  THE CHURCH DEFIES MODERN LIFE

     It is a topsy-turvy world. Catholics number, as I showed,
about 180,000,000, if you include children and illiterates on the 
fringe of civilization. In countries that we consider fully
civilized and organized they are about one-twentieth of the
population. They turn upon the 1920's with an insolence, an air of
superiority, like that of a duchess amongst her maids; and this air
of superiority is based upon a belief in devils and in
uncleanliness of sex that belongs essentially to an age of profound
ignorance. Catholic Action, remember, is not based upon the smooth
approaches of Catholic politicians when they seek office or
influence, or on the tactical affability of Jesuits in dealing with
non-Catholic, or on the spontaneous neighborliness of Catholic men
and women of the less fanatical type. It is based upon the teaching
and attitude of the Church as I have quoted them from the most
authoritative sources. It is in virtue of these doctrines that
Catholics are reconciled to see their Black International drag them
into alliance with all that is vilest and most dangerous in modern
life.

     Yet in America and Britain the nine-tenths or nineteen-
twentieths of the nation that are described in Catholic literature
as a debauched generation, a contamination and danger to the
virtuous Catholic family, load the Church with eulogies and
privileges. Upton Sinclair had the amusing impertinence to say,
when Haldeman-Julius invited him to reply to me, that he refused to
have anything to do with us because we did not rely upon "facts" as
he did! What has he done in regard to the massive volume of ugly
facts which I have given in these books? He illustrates his meaning
by quoting the instance of telepathy -- on which, by the way, I
spent months of research and wrote many pages before, apparently,
he ever heard of it -- and seems to invite us to bury ourselves in
a mound of tricky claims about this triviality while the Black
International gathers such wealth and power that it helps to flood
the world with misery and hopes to paralyze freedom in America. It
has already won such a position that the literature in which it
argues in favor of these weird ideas of the Dancing Dervishes of
old times is treated with deep respect by the press and libraries,
while literature in which we warn the world of the facts is
deliberately isolated from the public and treated as disreputable.
If statesmen, writers. editors, and professors really think that
they can maintain the solidity of their civilization by sacrificing
all their professed respect for reality and justice in one
important field and asserting it in others, by flattering what they
know to be untruth and closing their eyes to social poison, we do
not wonder that the fortunes of the race are so dangerously
menaced. It was by taking advantage of just such an attitude in
Britain, and France that the Axis powers gathered their formidable
strength.

                          ****     ****

    Reproducible Electronic Publishing can defeat censorship.

   The Bank of Wisdom is always looking for more of these old,
hidden, suppressed and forgotten books that contain needed facts
and information for today. If you have such books please contact
us, we need to give them back to America.


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               28



                        28 page printout

    Reproducible Electronic Publishing can defeat censorship.

          This file, its printout, or copies of either
          are to be copied and given away, but NOT sold.

          Bank of Wisdom, Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                          ****     ****

Edited by E. Haldeman-Julius

THE BLACK INTERNATIONAL                 No. 17

                   HOW THE FAITH IS PROTECTED

         THE UNIQUE APPARATUS OF THE BLACK INTERNATIONAL
                        TO SECURE LOYALTY

                        by Joseph McCabe

                  HALDEMAN-JULIUS PUBLICATIONS
                     GIRARD  -- : --  KANSAS

                          ****     ****

   CHAPTER

     I    Death and Damnation for the Unbeliever .............. 1

    II    Blinkers for the Believers .......................... 8

   III    Drawing the Dragon's Teeth ......................... 16

    IV    Sugar Plums for the Loyal .......................... 23


                          ****     ****

                            Chapter I

             DEATH AND DAMNATION FOR THE UNBELIEVER

     In 1928 Bertrand Russell said in the course of an address to
the British Rationalist Press Association that "in fifty years the
Roman Catholic Church will dominate America." For once I fail to
follow the reasoning of the distinguished mathematician. If we take
the estimate of the number of their members which the clergy supply
to the public authorities we find that in 1900 they claimed to be
15.7 of the entire population, in 1910 they had sunk to 14.1, in
1920 they claimed to be 16.9, in 1930 16.2, and in 1940, according
to the figures supplied to the Federal Council of the Churches,
15.9. Instead of a stately and convincing growth toward the
necessary 60 or 70 percent, much less an abnormally rapid growth,
we have here a curve of progress that gets back to its starting-
point in nearly half a century. It is not necessary to add that
until 1930 the growth of population was entirely different from
that in the other countries, for from 1900 until that date there
were about 17,000,000 immigrants, and more than half of these were 



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               1

                   HOW THE FAITH IS PROTECTED

Catholics: a fact strangely overlooked by all writers who are moved
to make profound observations when they see the decennial increases
of the Catholic population.

     On the other hand even many Americans will not know that not
only has the flood of immigration subsided to a modest stream but
there is evidence, which is accepted by Catholic authorities, that
the Catholic birth rate is being deliberately checked by parents.
About 80 percent of Catholics live in cities or towns, and in even
the most Catholic of these there has been a notable drop of the
birth rate. From 1920 to 1938 it sank in the towns and cities of
Massachusetts, where Catholics are strongest, from 23.7 to 13.8. In
New York City it fell from 23.4 to 14.4. Commenting on these
figures the Catholic Commonweal said:

     The urban Irish have long since stopped even reproducing
themselves, and the urban Italians and Slavs are rapidly following
their example.

     From the temperate language of the Catholic writer you would
not suspect that his Church puts the use of contraceptives on much
the same level as murder but, of course, he is distracting
attention from an obvious inference. It is one more proof, like
that I gave in the last book, of a serious defection from the
Church. However, what we have to note here is that the Catholic
body as estimated by the authorities is losing its treasured
advantage of a full birth rate as well as the advantage of
immigration. If we further recall that they claim only about 20,000
to 25,000 converts a year we feel that even Catholic arithmetic
will be severely strained to show the faintest glimmer of hope of
ever becoming the majority.

     But we have already seen the worthlessness of these Catholic
statistics. A common-sense appreciation of the evidence puts the
number of real Catholics in America at about 9,000,000 in 1900 and
about 15,000,000 today. The general population has increased by
nearly 80 percent: the Catholic population, in spite of all its
peculiarities, by less than 70 percent. The only "miracle" of
Catholic growth is that it is really a growth downward.

     But after all, you will say, the fact that the Church gets
15,000,000 Americans to subscribe to such a creed as I described in
the last book requires some explanation. Indeed, they seem not
simply to subscribe to it but, according to the apologists and the
Catholic press, to be more enthusiastic about their "holy faith"
than the members of any other civilized religion; except,
significantly enough, the semi-civilized Moslem fanatics who break
each other's polls in the Near East or the corresponding fanatics
in India. They take, we are told, such pride in it as a little girl
does in her first doll: they quite solemnly say that they have a
right to demand tolerance for themselves and refuse it to others:
and they swallow the excuses of the Black International for its
support of the vilest characters as smoothly as we swallow oysters.
Yet beyond any question the creed is as I stated it. The Catholic
who questions a single one of the dogmas, literally interpreted,
not only incurs hell but plainly questions the very foundations of
Church authority; and the Canon Law lays it down that the Catholic 
incurs this sentence if he confines his "liberalism" within his own
mind.
                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               2

                   HOW THE FAITH IS PROTECTED

     Yet again the miracle quickly loses its glamour when you
examine it closely. Of 15,000,000 people in the United States one-
third are under the age of 16, and you will not ask me to study
their beliefs. Indeed, with due acknowledgement of that respect for
youth which we old folk are learning I doubt if the beliefs of
youths and girls under 20 matter very much, and that means nearly
a half of them. To be quite blunt about it, in fact, I see nothing
to boast about in the belief of the majority of the remainder. Can
you speak of beliefs or merely practices? The religious life of a
good half of them consists in dodging the devil by going to Church
once a week for half an hour and faintly hearing a priest in the
far distance mumble prayers in Latin. The ease with which such folk
were swept away from the Church in millions in Europe and South
America as long as there was freedom of discussion shows what
shallow and feeble roots their faith has.

     Let us try to get a realistic view of the Catholic Church in
America instead of repeating all this frothy nonsense, which seems
to impress politicians, about 20,000,000 devout and enthusiastic
Catholics who put their faith above everything. Of the forty to
fifty million Catholic immigrants and their descendants the Church,
with its vast organization of priests, schools, newspapers, radio,
etc., and its colossal wealth has managed to retain within its fold
some 5,000,000 children, 5,000,000 folk who are under 20 or are on
so poor a cultural level that we are not interested in their
beliefs, and 5,000,000 men and women of sufficient education (often
only primary) and intelligence to suggest that they hold their
beliefs deliberately.

     We are not here concerned with the Angle of the politician who
counts votes, or the newspaper-proprietor, who counts dollars, or
the professor or writer, who counts readers. We are just trying to
understand how the Black International can maintain its baleful
activity in the 20th Century, and it is most instructive to study
its basis in America. This that I have described is its basis. All
talk about 20,000,000 Catholics who are the spiritual cream of the
country is bunk; and all talk about a triumphant progress that
promises to "make America Catholic" is double-distilled bunk. And,
as I have shown, the Roman Church is in modern times in the same
not very impressive condition in every country except where the
Black International has won back, by a combination of national
treachery and vile association with corrupt powers, its old power
of coercion.

     There is, therefore, not even a fascinating problem of
psychology in the survival of this medieval faith, as some imagine.
Sociologists and social psychologists, in fact, become politicians
when they notice "the venerable Church." It is a massive fact in
the social fabric, but they do not care to look too closely into
it. They suspect it may be as dirty and unhealthy, if you go too
close, as one of those thatched cottages in an old English village
which look so "cute" to the American who passes in an automobile.
We are not here examining the survival of the Roman faith in the
20th Century, or inquiring how grown-up and often educated men and
women can be induced to call it a "holy faith" and a beautiful
system, from any psychological interest. We are verifying our
suspicion that the faith is protected by just the same trickery, 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               3

                   HOW THE FAITH IS PROTECTED

deceit, and coercion as the Axis powers used in working their way
into a formidable position, and therefore the alliance, which seems
impossible or improbable to those who prefer to admire the Roman
Church from a distance, is entirely natural and was inevitable once
the reaction against democracy began.

     There was in every age a core of believers, of a particular
temperament, who did not need any action of the Black International
to bind them to the Church and who in very large part were of high
character; though their chastity was apt to be tinged with
intolerance and inhumanity and their charity associated with a sour
fanaticism. It is waste of time for writers to remind us of these
"many good men and women." It is the institution and its methods,
the general situation, that matters. And I have amply shown that
ever since the first "great Pope," Leo I (440-61), began to use
forgery in the interest of the Church and to burn heretics,
deception and violence were the weapons on which it relied rather
than upon argument. It is enough here to recall four critical
stages in the history of the Church. When in the 11th and 12th
centuries it was alarmed by the reawakening of the minds of Europe
it retorted with the Inquisition. When Protestantism broke its
power in the 16th Century it tried to drown it in blood in the
Thirty Years War. When the European powers conquered the French
revolutionary spirit and Napoleonic liberalism in the 19th Century
the Church allied itself intimately with the most corrupt of them
in a murderous attack on freedom and democracy. And when in our own
time America, Britain, and France in a narrow and discreditable
view of their own interests permitted new and popular anti-
democratic forces to gather strength, the Church at once entered
into alliance with them.

     This policy of violence is, I showed, actually the law of the
Roman Church. While American apologists were falsely stating that
the wicked historians of the last century -- the Catholic Lord
Acton used the strongest language of them all -- lied about the
Church, and that in any case it now abhors coercion and is all
sweetness and light, the Vatican press was issuing one edition
after another of Canon Law in which it is quite indignantly
affirmed, against "liberal" Catholics, that the Church has never
abdicated its "right of the sword": which, they explained, includes
lesser matters like torture or any physical sufferings or material
inflections (prison, fines, exile, confiscation, etc.). I gave the
words of the exact references to Marianus de Luca and Cardinal
Lepicier. The former was professor of Canon Law in the Papal
University, the latter in a Papal college at Rome, and both had the
Pope's stamp of approval on their books. Indeed, I see by the title
page of De Lucas book, which is quite savage in its long arguments
for the Church's right to kill or maim heretics, that it was
published in Rome, Ratisbon, and "Neo-Eboracum." As the latter is
the Latin for New York it seems that this truculent statement of
Church Law was simultaneously published, privately, in America for
the clergy, and we may be sure that it has an honored place in
those seminary or college-libraries in which apologists now pen
their assurances to the American public that the Church is the
mother of toleration and the soul of charity.




                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               4

                   HOW THE FAITH IS PROTECTED

     Professor C.J. Cadoux has an interesting chapter on this
aspect of Romanism (Roman Catholicism and Freedom, 1936, ch I). He
sums up its long history in the words of Prof. Lecky: "The Church
of Rome has shed more innocent blood than any other institution
that has ever existed among mankind" (The Rise and Influence of
Rationalism in Europe, II, 32). Lecky is so often quoted by
Catholics for his (unjust) compliments to the early Roman Church
that this is a hard saying. However, it is the modern development
that is particularly interesting. In 1832, when just such a
clerical-fascist tyranny ruled Europe as does today, Gregory XVI
said in an Encyclical: "Out of this most foul fountain of
indifferentism flows that absurd and erroneous opinion or rather
raving that liberty of conscience ought to be asserted and secured
for everybody." Catholics were at that time a negligible minority
in England and were enthusiastic for religious toleration, but in
the forties the Irish famine drove crowds of them to Britain, and
the Church became so optimistic that it forgot the mask sometimes.
In 1855 a writer in the Catholic Rambler (p. 178) attacked "the
impious and absurd theory of religious liberty" and, answering the
question what the Catholic would do if he ever got the majority in
England, he said: "If it would benefit the cause of Catholicism he
would tolerate you, but if expedient he would imprison you, banish
you, fine you, and possibly he might even hang you."

     Notice the date, 1885. The revolutionary wave of 1848 had
spent itself and under the blood-splotched banners of the
reactionary monarchs the Church was again speaking candidly. In
that year the Pope issued his famous Syllabus, and amongst the
"wicked opinions" which he required Catholics all over the world to
regard as "reprobated, proscribed, and condemned" were several such
as the following (literally translated from the Latin Syllabus):

     15. Every man is free to embrace and profess that religion
which he finds true in the light of human reason.

     17. At least there is hope of the eternal salvation of men who
do not belong to the true Church of Christ.

     80. The Roman Pontiff can and ought to be reconciled with
progress, liberalism, and modern civilization.

     And as late as 1864 in the Encyclical Quanta Cura he denounced
this modern fad of "liberty of conscience" as a "liberty of
perdition."

     But alas for the Papal Canute. The waves were already fretting
round his feet, and in a few more years he lost the Temporal Power
and saw the world coldly indifferent to, or jubilant over, the
defeat of the Church. Democracy, free general education, and a
demand for increasing liberty spread over Europe and Latin America.
The age of that "accommodation with modern civilization" which Pius
IX had contemptuously rejected set in. There was now no country in
the world in which the Church could exercise the power which it
claimed. Even in Spain rebels against the Church, who swarmed in
the cities and the universities, could not be touched unless they
were so advanced in their political views that they could be
branded "Anarchists," just as they are now branded Communists or 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               5

                   HOW THE FAITH IS PROTECTED

Bolsheviks. Many hundreds were treated thus, and the American and
British press lightly dismissed the murders and tortures as an
unpleasant necessity forced upon these Spanish gentlemen by
Anarchist bomb-throwers. It happened that I was in close touch with
one of these "Anarchists," Francisco Ferrer, an idealist who
loathed violence and polities and who was judicially murdered
solely to oblige the Church. I raised a stink in the whole English-
speaking world and got the fact generally recognized, but I could
not convince the public that Ferrer was only one of hundreds of
victims of the Spanish Church, and that foul tortures were used on
them in the jails from 1990 to 1910. The Black International in all
countries lied and used its power over the press to conceal the
fact that, where it thought it could safely do so, the Church still
exercised its right to maim or kill rebels against itself. It no
longer dressed them in a white sheet. It stuck a red flag in their
hands.

     In all the rest of the world except Spain it professed to be
"reconciled with progress, liberalism, and modern civilization," in
the words it had solemnly denounced a few decades earlier. Then
there opened the appalling new chapter in the history of
civilization. The high priests of reaction at Rome began to hear
voices which they thought had been stilled forever. France, needing
the political influence of the Church, treated it with a new
respect and granted it unexpected privileges and the Church in
France abandoned the hypocritical language of compromise. The
Jesuit Cardinal Billot, its head, wrote and published a Latin
Tractatus de Ecclesia Christi (1922) and the Jesuit Professor
Sortain a Traite de Philosophie (1924) in which the clergy were
candidly told that Rome still had the right to use physical
measures including the death-sentence, against heretics. In Italy
Mussolini began to deride liberty and liberalism in the language of
Pius IX and, after years of hard bargaining, the clergy clasped the
red hand he held out to them. A new Latin edition of the Canon Law
was issued, and the Pope in 1929 boldly and emphatically asserted
its claims for all the world to hear (in the letter to Gasparri
which I quoted at length in an earlier booklet). The Japs were the
next to enter into alliance with the resuscitated medieval Church,
and then Hitler....

     We have seen the story. But the Black International in America
continued to dupe the public and forbid the press to publish the
worst of the news -- like the Gasparri letter, the approach to the.
Japs, and the deal with Hitler -- that came from Europe. At the
very time when the Vatican was negotiating with Mussolini to sell
its assistance in crushing religious liberty in Italy the Culvert
Associates, the weightiest propagandist body of the Roman Church in
America, issued its Culvert Handbook of Catholic Facts, using the
names of the President (Coolidge) and several heads of professors
of American universities as "Sponsors." In this, while the Vatican
was driving a hard bargain for the suppression of the liberties of
non-Catholics in Italy, they audaciously reproduced, as
frontispiece, the letter in which Washington rejoices that "in this
land the light of truth and reason has triumphed over the power of
bigotry and superstition, and that every person may here worship
God according to the dictates of his own heart." Even Leo XIII, we
saw, had ridiculed that sentiment. And in the text of the book
these Culvert Associates, sheltering under the patronage of leaders

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               6

                   HOW THE FAITH IS PROTECTED

of American culture and business, assured the public that the
charge that the Church had used violence was based upon lies and
misrepresentation and that it is in principle in favor of the
American rule of religious liberty for all.

     People had already forgotten in America, and the press was
careful not to recall, something that had created a mild sensation
in 1910. President Roosevelt told the ambassador at Rome that he
was going to visit the king of Italy and would like a visit to the
Pope also arranged. The Vatican replied that it would welcome the
visit "if nothing like the recent Fairbanks incident arose to
prevent it." Vice-President Fairbanks had committed the
"unspeakable outrage on the common father of Christendom" (as the
Jesuit paper America called it) of calling at the Methodist Mission
in Rome after visiting the Pope! So Roosevelt was not to visit the
king of Italy if he wanted to see the Pope. Roosevelt promptly and
vigorously withdrew his proposal to call at the Vatican. A few
years later he entertained me at a lunch of honor at the Harvard
Club. If it were wildly conceivable that the President Roosevelt of
today were to confer some such honor on me, I wonder what the
Catholic, or even the ordinary, press would say.

     It illustrates what one would almost call the strangle-hold
that the Church has secured in America since 1918, and one use to
which it puts this is a complete deception of the public in regard
to the Church Law on tolerance and coercion. The irony is that its
position is based entirely upon the unique beauty and efficacy of
the creed I described in the last book. This is so precious to men
that the Church must guard them against losing it by burning
aggressive heretics at the stake and claiming the right to inflict
any sort of material penalty on men who are even "suspected of
heresy." Msgr. Ryan, the American Church's arch-apologist, thinks
it prudent never to discuss the monstrous claims of the Latin Canon
Law but in one amazing passage he gives away the principle. In 'The
State and the Church' he says:

     "The fact that the individual may in good faith think that his
false religion is true gives no more right to propagandize it than
the sincerity of the alien anarchist entitles him to advocate his
abominable political theories in the United States . . . Error has
not the same rights as truth. Since the profession and practice of
the erring are contrary to human welfare how can error have
rights?"

     And the man who writes this mush of priestly arrogance,
cunning appeal to prejudice, and bad logic is treated in Washington
as part of the cream of the national life. Does he mean that it
must be left to the Catholic to say what is absolutely true and
what is absolutely false? No. He obviously means that the medieval
hash of hell and devils, of Jesus Christ in the vest pocket and
little children suffering torture for all eternity, of blatant
forgeries and transparently fabricated doctrines, which I described
in the last book is so self-evidently true that all other religions
or philosophics of life must be suppressed; and his Canon Law
argues from the same principle that the Church has the right and
the duty to kill, maim, torture, or ruin any who attempt to spread
them. In the same book Ryan assures you that his Church is not one 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               7

                   HOW THE FAITH IS PROTECTED

in perfect harmony with but actually inspired American sentiment on
these matters! And a British cardinal, Gasquet, tells you that the
critics of the dear Church are "merchants of filth and garbage" who
pour out such a "Mississippi of lies" that he is bound to wonder if
they are "in good faith!"

     Naturally the Church will never again burn heretics. Even if
it ever got a large majority of sincere believers in Italy, Spain,
Portugal, and Brazil it would not dare to apply its law for fear of
the reaction in America and Britain. Only if all the leading
countries became solidly Catholic would it venture to do so -- and
it then certainly would apply the law -- and one might as well
think of a new Ice Age. The world has sunk low in recent years, but
the supposition that America, Britain, France, and Germany, would
ever by a large majority accept the childish creed and crooked
principles of Dr. Ryan's Church is too eccentric to consider. I
enlarge on the creed and its maxims only to remind the reader that
all baptized persons (Catholic or, if properly baptized,
Protestant) are its subjects, and that it holds the power of life
and death and all penalties over its subjects, so you understand
how its leaders come to ally themselves with arch-criminals when
these promise to restore its moth-eaten powers: how they can stoop,
as they do in Italy, Spain, Portugal, and Brazil to put the false
brand of Communists or murderous Reds on their critics so that
sycophantic statesmen will kill or torture them and the world-press
will say nothing.


                           Chapter II

                    BLINKERS FOR THE BELIEVER

     The loathsome little toad Goebbels has never forgotten his
Catholic education. The entire scheme by means of which he has
apparently, poisoned the minds of the overwhelming majority of the
German people is based upon Catholic principles and practice. The
scheme has, notoriously, two main features. The first is to print
deep upon the mind by hourly appeals to eye and ear the essential
Nazi formulae: that the German race is far superior to any other,
that its head is a particularly august and gifted man who must have
absolute obedience and any sacrifice he demands, and that there is
no salvation for any other nation except in the unity of German
culture and under German control. These assertions are repeated
every moment at every class in school and college, boomed out in
the streets, the workshops, and the restaurants, radioed every hour
into every home, repeated in every column of every paper, on every
page of every book and magazine, sung at every concert and village-
dance, incorporated in every drama and film, and implied in the
"Heil Hitler" which you must repeat when you call in the dog or buy
a pint of shrimps.

     The second feature is that nothing must enter the eye or ear
of any German to interfere with this good work. There is no private
radio, and you are shot if you listen to foreign transmissions.
Every paper, magazine, book, song, play, lecture, church, library,
pageant, or sports meeting, etc., in Germany falls under the
control of a very extensive and elaborate Reichskulturkammer with 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               8

                   HOW THE FAITH IS PROTECTED

a network of ramifications into every village. The social
psychology is perfect. The older folk may have memories of facts or
lessons learned in earlier years that may, in rare hours of
privacy, feebly conflict with this monopolistic message. The
younger folk have, on the street lines of modern science, no other
contents of "mind" -- ideas and sentiments, in the old language --
than these which Nazi education has implanted.

     The Black International must be green with envy. You might say
that at all events it has the advantage over Goebbels that it can
threaten folk who listen to any alien message with eternal torment,
but in practice it was always more effective to threaten torture
here and now than in the future. They recite the new Lord's Prayer:

"Lieber Herr Gott, mach' mich dumm,
Damit Ich nicht in Dachau Komm."

much more fervently than they did the old. Young women who but a
few years ago were "Children of Mary" and lustily sang "Immaculate,
Immaculate" now carry favor by singing unpleasant suggestions about
Miriam Cohen, which they insist was Mary's full name. For the great
majority the Catholic or the Protestant faith was skin-deep. The
Nazi faith is pumped into the marrow of their bones.

     The Church of Rome recognizes that the procedure is ideal but
it is in most countries prevented by "the world" (with the devil
behind it), the wickedness of which it never ceases to deplore from
carrying it out in all its purity as Goebbels does. In Italy, in
spite of the disgraceful sacrifices it has made, to get power, it
is very far from having a monopoly of the culture-stream. In Vichy,
France, it has, up to the present, been still more disappointed,
and it remains to be seen how Laval will earn his Papal
decorations. In Poland it almost had a Black Paradise but its Nazi
friends have chased it out. Only in Spain and Portugal, in Brazil
and some of the smaller Latin-American republics, and in stupid
little states like Slovakia which the Nazis tolerate for the time
being, has it got something like a monopoly of the mechanism for
making what we call "minds."

     Quebec may be indignant at being excluded from this small
group of enslaved states but it is not quite on the present level
of Spain and Portugal. In spite of the scandalous reticence of the
press generally most folk who are likely to read this know the
orgies of murder and torture in which Franco, under the eyes of
complacent American and British ministers, has indulged since he
won Spain for the Santa Fe. It has been going on for years in
Portugal. Read the section on Portugal (pp. 278-86) in Seldes's
Catholic Crisis. After quoting what Jesuits admiringly tell America
about it -- that it is "an applied resume of Catholic political
philosophy" and a land of profound peace, prosperity, and happiness
-- he gives this passage from Duff, the official of the British
Foreign Office who wrote as "Carlos Prieto":

     "Political prisoners are tortured in a manner which prevailed
during the Inquisition. . . . As reported by those who suffered
[Time and Tide, September 12, 1936], they include thumb-screws,



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               9

                   HOW THE FAITH IS PROTECTED

burning of the soles of the feet, squeezing the head in book-
presses, hanging by wrists and ankles, nude imprisonment in
temperatures below zero, and walking in a circle until the prisoner
drops.

     Salazar being a scientific man has added an electric chair,
not to kill but to torture, which is more beastly. This was written
six years ago, when Portugal was generally described as a happy
little state under its holy Catholic trinity of General Carmona,
Premier Salazar, and Cardinal Cerejeira.

     In blissful lands like this, in which the majority of the
workers are totally illiterate and would regard a radio receiver as
a new trick of the devil, where the clergy and a small minority of
interested supporters enjoy the bulk of what wealth there is, the
Black International can fairly emulate the success of Goebbels. In
countries like America they apply the two principles as effectively
as the wicked world allows them. They rely chiefly upon the
Catholic school, the Catholic press, and the threat of hell for
reading "bad books" or listening to critics.

     I described the operation of the Catholic schools in an
earlier book of this series. The apologist wants the public to
believe that -- here he puts on his most affable expression -- it
is just an institution like any other school for making efficient
citizens so is entitled to a full share of public funds, but the
Church provides the schools and asks only that it be, allowed to
give a few lessons to the children in their own faith. I gave the
words in which the Pope in his open letter to Cardinal Gasparri in
1929 expressly condemned that version of Catholic education. He
claimed not only that the education of children belongs primarily
to the Church not the state but he went on to say that the Church
would not agree to being "confined to the subsidized teaching of
religious truth:" that is to say, to including lessons on religion
by paid priests or teachers in the ordinary curriculum. The Church
must have the whole school. Its predominant purpose is to make
life-long Catholics, The Pope (Pius XI) made his meaning clear
enough in his encyclical on Catholic education:

     "A school does not become conformable to the rights of the
Church and of the Christian family and worthy to be attended by
Catholic children simply because religious instruction is given. .
. . That a school may be such all its teaching, all its
arrangements, teachers, program, and books, at all levels, must be
inspired by the Christian spirit, under the direction and maternal
vigilance of the Church, so that religion may be truly both the
foundation and the crown of all instruction, in all grades, not
only primary but also intermediate and higher."

     The school, in other words, must be a perfect Goebbelesque
institution. It must strike one note -- Holy Faith, Holy Father,
Holy Mother -- and see that it is not disturbed by any other note.
I do not know about America but in Britain the Catholic clergy get
about 50 percent of the cost of this sort of thing met out of
public funds and fire their people with a cry that they are treated
with gross injustice and prejudice because it is not more.



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               10

                   HOW THE FAITH IS PROTECTED

     I told in an earlier book how, not satisfied with this, they
tried to get the teaching, especially the historical lessons, in
the public schools modelled on Catholic lines. J.W. Poynter, who
was at the time in the inner circle or plotting center of British
Catholicism, describes the conspiracy in Roman Catholics and School
History Books (1930). It amazed and disgusted him even while he was
a Catholic. They operated with such stealth that, although he was
a member of their Vigilance Committee, they tried to keep him in
ignorance, but he contrived to see a copy of the privately printed
two-volume work (1,400 pages) of the "errors" they wanted corrected
in the books in use in government schools. Luther was to be
described as "an unworthy German friar" and Bloody Mary -- the most
truculent fanatic who ever sat on the English throne -- as a gentle
lady who was all for religious freedom. They relied on Catholic
Trade Unionists and Catholic officials in the Education Department
to secure this monstrous gain for them. Is that what they have done
in Boston and other American cities?

     The books they use in their own schools and shower upon the
children as prizes are poisonous and crammed with lies about saints
and martyrs, Popes, the medieval Church, the Reformation, and so
on. I have before me a book written for children and child-like
adults by the Australian Archbishop Sheehan and much used in
Ireland and Australia (A Simple Course of Religion, 1938). It is
deliciously Illustrated. There is a half-tone illustration of Adam
and Eve with less clothing on than Tarzan and Maureen. There is
another -- but in this case the child is conscientiously warned
that it is "not a real picture" -- of the Holy Trinity and (an old
man, a Nordic type of young man, and a pigeon): one showing the boy
Jesus ("he who made the starry skies") holding a board while Papa
planes it: one of Jesus giving "Holy Communion" to the apostles
1900 years ago in the form of wafers from a modem silver chalice:
one showing a soul, which is a duplicate of the body, being taken
up to heaven by angels. Most children will take these to be
photographs of the actual persons and events.

     The learned archbishop might plead that it is lawful to tell
children fairy-tales and open their eyes later, but almost as
childish is another book I have, by Bishop H.G. Graham (What Faith
Really Means, 1914), that is intended for grown-ups. Some of you
may still boggle at my description of the Catholic doctrine of the
Eucharist: that the real living body of Jesus is physically present
in every consecrated wafer and drop of wine. Graham to clinch the
matter, tells his readers that Jesus "often appeared to holy
priests at Mass under the sweet figure of a little child" (p. 92).
I told, I think, how another of these pious fairy-tales is that
blood often spurts from the wafer when wicked Freemasons and
Satanists stab it. We are not told that Jesus ever does anything
when he is handled (in the Mass) by priests who smile at the dogma
or sleep with their domestic servants. However, these doctrines are
so luminously true that it is "impossible to shake a Catholic's
faith," the bishop says. Then how about these millions of
acknowledged seceders in America and Britain? There is no such
thing as a quite honest seceder, Graham -- in full accord with
Canon Law -- says. Referring to the man who professes that he has
left the Church he says: "We know for certain that he has gone
wrong, and that he has culpably lost the gift of faith": when a 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               11

                   HOW THE FAITH IS PROTECTED

priest secedes Catholics who become aware of it -- the fact is
denied unless the scoundrel takes to writing books and it can be
denied no longer -- are always taught that the reason was either
pride, lust of women, or to get more drink; as if the apostate
priest, who generally takes years to earn a moderate living, got
one-tenth the opportunities for fornication or had one-tenth the
chances to get drunk that he had in the Church.

     This zone of poison-gas to protect the "precious gift of
faith" which is planted in the child's mind begins to be formed in
the school. But in a non-Catholic country the defenses are very
imperfect. From the exotic atmosphere of the school the child
rushes, especially in the late afternoon, into a very different
atmosphere. Distinguished paedagogists and psychologists have
inquired very learnedly into the frequency of religious conversion
in the adolescent. That sort of inquiry is legitimate. It does not
offend Catholics. But no academic authority ever studies the
immensely greater frequency of religious de-version (if I may use
the word) amongst the adolescent, especially Catholic boys and
youths. It is a common subject of discussion at conferences of
Catholic teachers, and I have earlier quoted the admissions of
various priests that from 50 to 80 percent of the boys who attend
Catholic schools give up the faith when they leave. Goebbels can
keep the blinkers on Nazi boys during all their waking hours. The
world outside the school is as saturated with the Nazi creed as the
school itself. But the Catholic boy tears off his blinkers when the
five or Six hours in school are over and sees the world of reality.

     I broadly described the system by means of which the priests
try to protect in post-school years the "Catholic mind" they have
built up. The weekly sermon, the Catholic press and literature, and
now the Catholic Radio Hour are the chief agencies, and the main
purpose of them is to keep the faithful in their blinkers. The
pretence that the sole object is to maintain a high moral character
in the Catholic body is disproved by the actual character of that
body, as I have shown in earlier books and will further show in the
final book of this series; and the pretence that it is to attract
outsiders to the faith is disproved by the miserable trickle of
25,000 converts (often for social or other non-religious grounds)
a year. The greatest concern of the national branches of the Black
International in all non-Catholic or mixed countries is to protect
the belief of Catholics themselves by a smoke-screen.

     I am not sure if I ought not to say, as I hinted above, a
poison-gas zone to keep the believers from straying into alien
pastures. It is another of the discreditable distinctions of the
Church of Rome that its priests and writers consistently use fowler
language about their critics and opponents than do the writers or
clergy of any other Church. The law of libel alone restrains them.
During the forty-five years in which I have criticized the Church
-- and they will probably say that I am its most formidable critic
-- I have never known them to put in print -- they, of course, put
all sorts of picturesque rumors into whispered circulation -- one
single word reflecting on my character in such form that I could
have the matter settled in court, yet it is the almost universal
practice to say that opponents of the Church are dishonest and
mendacious. I quoted the most learned cleric of the British 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               12

                   HOW THE FAITH IS PROTECTED

Catholic Church, Cardinal Gasquet affirming that we pour out a
"Mississippi of lies." But you probably know this feature of
Catholic literature and propaganda. These booklets contain hundreds
of examples.

     The psychology of it is simple. The main element of the
education of the Catholics themselves is that the body of doctrine
is so beautiful, so clearly true and reasonable, that no one can be
in good faith who abandons it and no one can resist its appeal who
really knows it. It is on this basis alone that Catholics can be
reconciled to the intolerance which claims complete liberty, or
even a privileged position, in a non-Catholic country and flatly
denies liberty to other religions in a Catholic land, as to the
gross inconsistency of the clergy in urging them to get non-
Catholics to read or listen to Catholic stuff while sternly
forbidding them to read what the non-Catholic says. But even the
Catholic, if he happens to stumble upon, for instance, the official
report that 31 percent of the conscripts for the armed forces
confess to Catholic baptism while only about 20,000,000 members of
the Church are claimed (or about 15 percent instead of 31), must
feel that it is rather thin to impute "bad faith" to these millions
of seceders, and that the claim that the faith is irresistible to
those who know it, when the immense annual expenditure on books,
papers, lectures, and radio brings in only a few thousand converts
a year is still thinner.

     So the Church imposes on believers the supplementary theory
that their faith is so holy and so necessary for good conduct in
this world and salvation in the next that it is arch-enemies the
world and the devil, engage in a gorgeous campaign of lies and
misrepresentation against it. This may sound melodramatic, but
after what we saw about the real nature of Catholic dogmas and the
extraordinary pride of Catholics in them you will expect
melodramatic or childish features. It is a unique religious system,
and it is on that basis alone that we can understand the action of
the Black International in openly conspiring with the enemies of
America and Britain and of modern civilization yet retaining the
enthusiastic allegiance of 17,000,000 Americans and Britishers.

     Naturally this line of argument is handed out on every
possible note, from hesitating insinuation to blunt and blatant
affirmation. Most people would be surprised at the extent to which
even educated Catholics accept it. Soon after I left the Church I
met on the streets of London a Catholic teacher, master of a school
in a middle-class suburb, who knew me. He turned pale, either with
anger or fear, and asked me, very seriously, if I was not afraid
that the earth would open and let me down to where I belonged.
Another, an older and better-read Catholic schoolmaster, who had
been all admirer of mine and to whom I proposed to explain my
secession, replied (in a letter reproduced in my Twelve Years in a
Monastery) that he would not listen to a word but left me to "the
worm of conscience" and only trusted I would not sink to "the
lowest depths." A well-known priest of high character wrote me that
he supposed he would soon hear that I had "run off with another
man's wife." A Catholic novelist can hardly introduce an ex-priest
into his story without leaving him under a dark cloud and souring
the reader against him.


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               13

                   HOW THE FAITH IS PROTECTED

     All this is part of the blinker-system of the Church. One, of
course, finds some degree of hostility to or dislike of seceders in
every Church but in none does it approach the virulent hatred of
seceders and critics inspired by the Black International. Poynter,
who had been for years on the inner councils of Catholic Action,
told me, though I hardly needed the information, that the
instruction given to writers and speakers was that they must not
directly attack name critics of the Church -- people might want to
read their books -- but keep up the fiction that all such critics
and apostates are a lot of scurvy knaves, sold to the devil and
cooperating in his frenzy to destroy the beautiful Church which
alone frustrates his strange passion to pervert the whole race. Dip
into almost any Catholic weekly if you want a little clean fun.
Correspondents have often told me of the effect of all this on
Catholics. They turn pale if my name is maliciously dragged into a
conversation with them, They burn my books when they get an
opportunity. Once, soon after I left the Church, a society billed
me in large posters, to lecture in the city of Manchester, and most
of the bills were torn off the walls during the night. I may
confess since she came to more liberal views before she died, that
it was my sister, a Catholic schoolmistress, who spent a night
roaming over the city, dodging the police and tearing down the
posters.

     This calculated hatred and slander of critics has the double
effect of preventing Catholics from reading them and at the same
time convincing them that their faith really is the most beautiful
and salutary thing in the world seeing that the devil and wicked
men have such a peculiar rage against it. Add that, as Bishop
Graham says and theology and Canon Law expressly teach, it is a
mortal sin (like rape or murder) to have even a doubt about a dogma
of the Church, and it is equally a mortal sin to expose yourself to
the danger of having a doubt by reading critics, and you have the
particular strength of the Catholic prohibition of the reading of
"bad books." Works or articles which criticize the, faith or the
priests in even the most dignified language are purposely bracketed
by the Church with what it calls obscene books. They are in fact,
proved by that famous Catholic logic to be worse than obscene
books. How? Quite easily. The sin of fornication or masturbation to
which the obscene book may lead can be confessed and dismissed from
the mind. But the doubt, the devil's own child, has a way of
lingering or recurring after confession. . . .

     One of the real mistakes of outsiders about the Church. --
they are almost always mistakes in favor of the Church or failures
to realize the full absurdity or monstrosity of its doctrines -- is
to suppose that the priest, like any other religious minister, just
paternally warns his "flock" that it is dangerous to read books
against his faith. Not a bit of it. The Church of Rome is again
unique, as it always is when it is protecting the interests of the
Black International. No other religion has gone so far as to put
"Commandments of the Church" on the same level as the Decalogue and
say that transgression of them is punishment with eternal torment.
And it is a very stern law of the Church that forbids the reading
of "bad books."




                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               14

                   HOW THE FAITH IS PROTECTED

     The domestic or private part of the Canon Law in its latest
version -- now an official code not a professor's lectures -- may
be read in English, if you can safely separate the text from the
bemusing commentary in Woywood's Practical Commentary on the Code
of Canon Law: One of the longest clauses in it (1399) deals with
the reading of books against faith or morals. The Catholic must not
read any non-Catholic translation of the Bible -- the English
Bible, for instance, or books which defend "fortune-telling,
divination, or magic," or books that defend the law of divorce,
etc. You wonder how he gets through the Sunday paper. However, the
main point is that he must not read "books by any non-Catholic
treating professedly of religion unless it is certain that they
contain nothing contrary to the Catholic faith" or any books
"tending in any way to undermine the very foundations of religion."
Certain Catholics may get permission from the bishop (who in
practice delegates the authority to confessors) to read a book of
this kind if they have a serious reason, not merely curiosity, but
even the bishop's permission "exempts nobody from the provisions of
the natural law which forbids the reading of books that are for the
particular reader a proximate occasion of sin" or, in other words,
may inspire a doubt. So the permission given with the right hand is
taken away with the left. And lest you should think that this is
just an academic prohibition -- a sort of paternal "don't let me
catch you with your pants down" -- clause 2318 grimly says that
Catholics who possess or read, without permission, books by
apostates criticizing the Church are ipso facto excommunicated.
That is hell with the lid off. By the very act of reading a single
paragraph they incur the awful penalty and cannot approach the
Church to confess it or hold communication with any other
Catholics. The Church will give a gorgeous funeral to a notorious
boss-gangster and murderer but will insist that the monster who has
read one of these booklets and not been reconciled shall be buried
like a dog. Any priest can absolve the murderer but the wretch who
has read one of McCabe's foul books without the bishop's permission
has to be re-admitted to the Church by the bishop or the Pope.

     You begin to understand the defense-mechanism of the Black
International but you have not yet got the half of it. It obviously
follows that the Catholic must not attend a lecture in which the
Church may be criticized. Once, lecturing in a district which had
a large Catholic population I saw two burly Irish priests brazenly
walk through the room and look at every face to see if any of their
parishioners had dared to attend! On the next Sunday, doubtless,
they would urge Catholics to drag their non-Catholic, friends to a
Catholic lecture. But it is not generally known that the Catholic
is forbidden under the same penalty to enter into private
discussion of religion with any man who has the ability or the
knowledge to disturb him. Clause 1325 runs:

     "Catholics shall not enter into any disputes or conferences
with non-Catholics -- especially public ones -- without the
permission of the Holy See or, in urgent case, of the local
Ordinary (bishop)."

     The public debate is here forbidden only a little more
stringently than the discussion of religion with a non-Catholic
neighbor. You may at times have noticed how shy of discussing his 
faith your neighbor is, but this particular clause is not widely 

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               15

                   HOW THE FAITH IS PROTECTED

known to Catholics, and the priest is careful not to mention it.
The unbeliever might scoff, and even the believer might become
suspicious when he is told that his faith is solidly based that it
is "absolutely impossible to shake it" yet he must not argue about
it with a non-Catholic friend.

     Catholics never read Canon Law. It is the priest's business to
convoy these commands of the Church to the faithful. During his
visits to his parishioners he has a keen scent for heretical books,
and I have known him to put books of mine (loaned by request) on
the fire in the house to emphasize the law and his authority.
Chiefly he acts through sermons. He talks more about bad books than
he does about chastity, and to a point we will admire his honesty,
for he would, far rather see them reading spicy novels than
criticisms of the Church. Every Catholic, therefore, is quite
familiar with the law. But do not imagine that you will disturb him
by pointing out that he challenges you to read both sides but must
absolutely refuse himself to read your side. Error, remember, has
not the same rights as truth. In any case, he will tell you his
writers and lecturers always faithfully tell him what the opponents
of the Church say. The poor fish! If there is one field of their
work in which they are more recklessly untruthful than another it
is in quoting or giving an account of the arguments of their
opponents or suppressing all knowledge of them. Quotations are
false and no exact reference given so that you cannot check them.
Priests writing on science are shorn of their clerical titles and
passed off as authorities. Writers on science of the last century
are quoted as living authorities. . . . But my works abound in
examples of the unscrupulous trickery exercised in this field.

     As to the Index of Prohibited Books, although it is still in
force and receives an addition every few years, you may dismiss it
from consideration. No priest has a copy of it, and Catholics have
no idea of the utter stupidity which the Vatican has betrayed in
compiling it. Originally and until the 18th Century it served as a
guide to Inquisitors in examining the library of a suspect. For the
last century and a half criticisms of the Church have poured out in
such floods even in Latin countries, that it is impossible to
compile a catalogue; and there would not be much good literature
left outside it. The Church relies on the general prohibition of
the Canon Law and the libeling of critics. Non-Catholic writers who
praise the "discipline" and "organization" of the Church are as
culpable as those who a few years ago praised the discipline and
organization of the Fascist or the Nazi party. One wonders if they
recognize it even now when they see the Black International in
alliance with the powers of evil.


                           Chapter III

                   DRAWING THE DRAGON'S TEETH

     From figures which I have earlier given we are compelled to
conclude that if the Roman Church in America has only about
15,000,000 genuine members there must be at east a further
10,000,000 who were baptized in the Church and have abandoned it.
How did they come to surmount the spiked rails the Church puts 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               16

                   HOW THE FAITH IS PROTECTED

round them and venture beyond the poison-zone which lays between
them and its critics. From observation and inquiry I should say
that the great majority of these seceders never read anything
against the Church. Living psychology is a matter of great lucidity
and infinite variations, but you can fairly divide this mass of
seceders into two classes: a minority of thinking and reading folk
and a majority of folk who think little and read less.

     The apologetic plea that these millions of the majority-folk
are therefore men and women who just "resented the restraints which
the good Church put upon their passions" and are pretending to have
lost faith in it is so childish that you may find it difficult to
believe that it is urged. Very large numbers of Catholics have
friends, neighbors, or relatives who have left the Church and know
how false this theory of their secession is: besides that the idea
that church-goers do not drink or misbehave as much as seceders
will tickle many Catholics. "In my parish," said a Glasgow priest
to me when I was in the Church, "young folk do not marry until they
have proof that they will have children"; and your 10,000,000
American seceders must be heroic if they drink more than the Irish
or are more amorous than the Latin Americans. "Since a Polish force
was encamped in this district," a British correspondent wrote me a
few weeks ago, "all the girls are pregnant." I will give figures
and authorities in a later book.

     The simplest and most plausible explanation of secession from
the Roman Church is the utter absurdity, arbitrariness, or
inhumanity of its characteristic doctrines as I have described
them. You need no malevolent critic or devil-inspired book to help
you to see this. As a matter of fact the heaviest secessions, I
have shown, are of boys of fourteen to sixteen or seventeen, and
the moralist who suggests that they want to "give rein to their
passions" is as absurd as the man who supposes that to any extent
they read books criticizing the Church. They came as spontaneously,
or with a little assistance from comrades in the workshop, to see
that what they have been taught is "crazy" as the artist who knows
only the rich church near his home thinks its services beautiful.
This is, in fact, often the development in the case of well-
educated as well as uneducated seceders. Reading critics of the
Church or theology had nothing whatever to do with my own
secession, and I have met many other men of intellectual life who
rejected Romanism because, without outside impulse, they sat down
to a critical Study of their beliefs.

     "It Pays to Advertise" businessmen say, in the language of a
certain comedy. Not always. The Church of Rome in America spends
hundreds of millions of dollars annually in advertising its goods
to the general public, and its crop of 20,000 converts a year is
hardly worth $10,000 a year to it. It is advertising obviously
unsound goods, and folk stream out of it because they see this.
Doubt usually precedes inquiry. When a man begins to suspect that
the iron hand of the Church is a device in its own interest, when
he looks fantastic or repulsive doctrines squarely in the face, he
crosses the spiked fence and the poison-zone and his eyes are
opened to the great deception that has been practiced on him. The
first step is largely a matter of temperament.



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               17

                   HOW THE FAITH IS PROTECTED

     That is, I think, in most cases the psychology of the seceder,
and the clerical defense-mechanism I have described is useless
against it. But even the first faint doubt is very apt to be
inspired by some news in the press or some remark in conversation,
by the sight of the growing general indifference to religion, by
reflection on the obvious fact that so few men of any intellectual
distinction ever join the Church, and so on. The doubt that arises
justifies a man in looking outside the Church for help in checking
its doctrines, and he soon learns how unscrupulous Catholic writers
are in pretending to state the arguments of their critics,

     For instance, I noticed in an earlier book a volume in which
the very popular and allegedly learned apologist Fulton Sheen
complains that Catholicism is actually "intellectually
impoverished" by the lack of "a good sound intellectual opposition"
today. In the same work he has a chapter on the evolution of man,
and he tells his Catholic readers that only "two fossils" have been
found that have a bearing on it. The Catholic reader is free to go
to the Natural History Museum to see the "two fossils" or to take
out a book on prehistoric man, and he finds that at the time when
Sheen made this idiotic statement (betraying an incredible
ignorance of the subject) the prehistoric remains already
discovered would, if decently interred, fill a nice little
cemetery. The Catholic, however orthodox, no longer wonders that no
scientific man cares to notice his apologists, and he goes from
science to history and finds that the deception is even greater. He
realizes that the idea that "the world" -- which means everything
and everybody outside Catholicism -- is so vicious and depraved
that it has to be coupled with the flesh and the devil, is a
clerical trick, and that the malice and untruth are in the Church
itself.

     To combat this danger the Church in non-Catholic countries
like America relies on the third part of its defense-mechanism, the
first being, as I said, the Catholic school, the second the stern
prohibition of any access to criticism of the Church. Isolation of
the active-minded Catholic is no longer possible, though the
majority of the 7,000.000 or so adult members of the Church in
America may be trusted to isolate themselves. Of 200 people living
in the street in which I write I should say that one-fifth never
read anything and one-fifth never look at anything above the level
of the picture-paper or a weak sentimental novel. American
Catholics with their very large proportion of immigrants and the
poorer workers come under an even less flattering analysis. But
there are millions of ordinary citizens amongst them who read the
daily paper through, use the free or subscription library and mix
freely with neighbors of all religions or none. It is from this
body that the secessions occur, and it has been found futile to
hope to counteract all the news and impressions they pick up by
sophistry and untruth in the Catholic weekly. The Black
International must neutralize the poison in the sources of their
information and their impressions. This work began with the
plausible plea, on the lives of good-neighborly feeling, that
nothing must be said or done that is "offensive to Catholics," and
this was so easily accomplished that the Black International went 




                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               18

                   HOW THE FAITH IS PROTECTED

on to ensure to a remarkable extent that the sources of a man's
ideas and impressions -- newspapers, radios, books, libraries, 
political speeches, etc. -- should be used to flatter the Church
and lie about its defects and its achievements.

     These two series of booklets contain so many hundred
illustrations of this that I might be content to leave the matter
there, but unfortunately few people realize to what an appalling
extent this one-tenth of the nation, with its prodigious wealth and
its powerful organization, have been permitted to poison the wells
of public instruction. Until Japan made its crafty attack on
America it was common to hear rather disdainful expressions about
the way in which France and Britain had been led by the nose to the
brink of the pit which the Nazis and Fascists had dug. In Australia
and Canada as well as America the old formula that the British are
an old and effete nation, destined to lose the high position they
had won in history, was revived and generally repeated. The
apostasy of France did not open the eyes of critics to the truth,
for even now the press will not tell how the Church had worked for
that betrayal. The situation is now much the same in America and
Britain, yet in neither country is there even a broad recognition
-- in spite of the stubborn isolationism of Catholics to the last
moment and the present disgraceful conduct of the Church in Quebec
-- of the monstrous part that the Black International has played or
the fact that both countries were kept slumbering by a press that
gravely betrayed them under the equal influence of Catholicism and
capitalism.

     At the moment, for instance, there is some fuss because in the
very middle of its foul onslaught Japan is announced to have
exchanged ambassadors with the Vatican. I take it -- there is not
time for American news on this point to reach me -- that your
apologists smooth out the anger as they do here. One British paper
(Glasgow Herald), a fairly independent and honest daily, ventured
to express its editorial indignation, and this was at once
counteracted by a long letter from a Catholic (a Benedictine abbot,
I believe) of the most untruthful and misleading character. The
gist of it was that the Vatican had for years sought in vain
permission from the Japanese to supervise the spiritual interests
of its subjects in Japan, and no one would expect it to withdraw
from so purely religious a request, especially as the Church "never
interfered in polities," when the Japs offered it in the present
year. This is the usual constructive lie relying on the poor memory
of the public and the reluctance of editors to recall facts which
Catholics would resent.

     My readers know that in 1937 (The A B C Library of Living
Knowledge, No. 6) I fully warned them of the criminal aims of Japan
and the close cooperation of the Vatican with it since 1931. I
said, and I gave the evidence in an earlier book of this series,
that the plan to exchange ambassadors was agreed upon in 1935, as
the Pope's own paper, the Osservatore, joyously announced. In the
British press this development of cordial relations with the
Vatican, in order to get Catholic influence on the press all over
the world, was smothered in the usual way, but Americans ought to
have known what to expect. In October (14) 1937 the Associated
Press had a cable from its Rome correspondent generally reproduced 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               19

                   HOW THE FAITH IS PROTECTED

in the papers. The information was from "a reliable Vatican source"
and was to the effect that "the Holy See has instructed its
hierarchy and missions in the Far East to cooperate with Japanese
action in China," and the memorandum it had sent was calculated to
"give the Japanese military authorities the clear impression that
on the part of the Catholic Church there is no obstacle to complete
collaboration." The message was, Seldes says, denied by the Vatican
and by the Pope's representative at Washington. The A.P. replied
that its agent had got the message confirmed at the Vatican Press
Bureau before he issued it. The well-known journalist, Pegler,
stated in a syndicated article (which is before me now) that from
his own knowledge of the Vatican Press Bureau, which he described
as corrupt, he had no doubt of the truth of the report and that
"the editors of the Catholic Press in this country are not ignorant
of the situation." Yet the Catholic press denied it with the usual
show of anger and injured innocence, and the whole weight of the
Church's influence was used to dupe the public. And meantime, as I
showed, the Vatican continued -- to cultivate the most cordial
relations with Japan and gave Matsuoka, its special agent for
hoodwinking America, a gold medal when he visited the Pope in 1941.
The plea that Japan has for the first time acceded to the Pope's
long pressure for diplomatic relations and that the purpose is
purely ecclesiastical is brazen but Catholics get away with it.
They control the press.

     This was not the first or weightiest proof of the way in which
the Black International in America had began to poison the wells.
In 1936 Franco had raised the flag of revolt in Spain. The
spontaneous reaction of America wag to support the Spanish
government, in spite of the flood of libels of it already released
in the Catholic press, as the revolt was notoriously a Fascist
attempt to destroy a democracy. Seldes estimated that 98 percent of
America was against Franco. 50 percent of American Catholics were
against him (as shown by a Gallup Survey), but 98 percent of the
Catholic prelates were strong against the Spanish government. So
the duped laity of Catholic Action Were driven into the field by
their clerical slave-drivers. By 1938 hardly a paper in America did
justice to the Loyalists or dare speak of "Rebels." Every Catholic-
Fascist lie was endorsed, and the most contemptible methods were
adopted to suppress the truth and secure the triumph of injustice.
When a small group of Spanish priests came over to tell America the
truth they were pitilessly persecuted. Proprietors of halls were
threatened if they wanted to open them to the priests, and managers
of hotels were threatened if they gave them rooms. Firms were even
bullied and boycotted for sending medical supplies to the Spanish
government. Roosevelt was induced by Catholics to load the scales
against the hard-pressed democrats by an Embargo, and when the open
and cynical intervention of Italy and Germany showed that it was
unjust, he was dissuaded by Catholics from lifting it. A Washington
official is said to have declared that the one man in America who
could get the cruel Embargo lifted was Cardinal Mundelein. In the
end it was difficult to ascertain the truth. Publishers who
accepted books which told it, newspapers which reviewed them, and
libraries which circulated them were threatened or penalized. It
was a massive exhibition of the virtually Fascist power which the
Black International had won in America.



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               20

                   HOW THE FAITH IS PROTECTED

     Seldes gave a list of 18 general charges against the Church of
grave misconduct in turning (as it always does) the tolerance which
it had won in America into a bitter intolerance of others and a use
of violent and unscrupulous methods to prevent the public from
learning the truth. As far as machinery is concerned these charges
are that it exercises in its own interest a most vicious pressure
on the press -- it has made an end of the boasted freedom of the
press in America -- publishers, libraries, public meetings, and the
letting of public buildings by state authorities. Seldes should
have added a scandalous interference with the school-books used in
public schools (Boston, etc.). It achieves its aim generally by
intimidation, sometimes by organizing mobs of fanatical or low-
class Catholics to use violence. Generally it is enough to threaten
a secession of Catholic readers or advertisers. Certain papers
which have done so much to lower the standard of American
journalism are ready and eager at any time to reap profit by
catering to the Catholic authorities and attracting Catholics from
papers which make some effort to make a stand for freedom and
independence; just as there has been a lamentable growth in America
of writers, especially of history, who manipulate or color the
facts to get Catholic recommendation and circulation. Newspapers
and books used to be the most dangerous part of that "world" which
the Black International dreaded, so they have with almost complete
success drawn the teeth of the dragon.

     Heywood Broun said years ago that "there is not a single New
York editor who does not live in terror of this group." I spent six
months in New York in 1917 and wanted to get out a book on the
Roman Church. I had not then met Haldeman-Julius and did not know
how he kept the banner of freedom flying in a corner of Kansas. But
a well-known New York publisher told me that I would not find a
publisher for such a work in New York. My friend G.H. Putnam had
published one for me, but he complained that he had hoped I would
be less critical and he did not publish another. He had submitted
the manuscript of his own History of the Index to several priests
before he published it. The general excuse of journalists, editors,
writers, publishers, librarians, and bookstore-owners is that they
do not want to stir sectarian strife. There can be few of them who
do not recognize in their own minds today that if there bad not
been this mighty conspiracy during the last ten years to suppress
all news that the Church wanted suppressed the world would not have
drifted into its present appalling condition.

     The political weapon for breaking the teeth of their opponents
is similar to the economic; indeed both are at the bottom economic.
It is astonishing to find an intelligent Catholic repeating the
clerical bleat that "the Church never interferes in polities." Some
writers discuss the matter at length but the answer is simple.
Whenever the interests of the Church are involved in any political
issue it not only interferes but on its own principles is bound to
do so, and no one accuses it of interfering in a political struggle
in which its own interests, directly or indirectly, are not
involved. But when you reflect that its "interests" mean not simply
the moral or religious welfare of its subjects but very decidedly
the acquisition of power and wealth -- as a means of doing further
good, of course -- you see how easily it is entangled in political
troubles.


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               21

                   HOW THE FAITH IS PROTECTED

     Why in New York did it take so open a part on the reactionary
side in the struggle for the Child Labor Amendment, in Washington
on the question of the enlargement of the Supreme Court, in various
places in local labor disputes? Why did it flirt so openly with
Wall Street and the annexationists during the church-trouble in
Mexico? These are American matters which I leave to writers like
Seldes, but why the sacred fury year after year against Russia and
Communism? The persecution of religion was a false and hollow
excuse. The outstanding reasons were to protect the enormous wealth
which the Church has in many countries and to win the interest and
favors of capitalists like Ford.

     I have dealt in an earlier book with the remaining aspect of
the Roman Church's justification of its censorship, intolerance,
bullying, bribery, and corruption of the organs of public
instruction: its plea that in getting a large control of the movies
and the circulation of books and plays it serves a most important
national purpose by scotching immoral tendencies. It is far more
anxious to suppress a pro-Spanish (democratic) film like "Blockade"
or a pro-Russian film than to cut out an occasional sex-joke or to
turn the clerical microscope upon the celluloid strip of a bathroom
or bedroom scene. American law has in this respect fixed the limits
of freedom as narrowly as any other and more narrowly than the law
of most Catholic countries, and the American public are generally
content with the police-interpretation of the law. They want no
dog-collared amateurs to assist them. The Black International seeks
this power partly because it raises its prestige in the country and
partly to complete its control of the means of enlightening the
public. To an outsider it seems amazing how Americans, who in spite
of police and parsons show in their novels, plays and films that
they take as sensible a view of sex as any in the world, tolerate
this hypocritical meddling of a minority which merely seeks to
advertise and augment its own power. It reminds me of a certain
British author who was well-known for his writings on and zeal
against the White Slave Traffic. A friend who lived in the same
block of apartments -- very expensive apartments -- as he in
London, assured me that it was not uncommon to see the man going,
half or more than half drunk, to his rooms at night with a "white
slave" on each arm.

     For some readers, in fine, who may have happened to meet a few
priests and who are reluctant to accept what they feel to be a very
serious indictment of the clerical body, let me add a few words.
This attitude is usually very illogical. I have met men who adopted
it on the strength of a social meeting with a single priest or
bishop. Not only has this no relation to the question of the
methods of the clerical body, not only are priests in such
circumstances only too anxious to impress a non-Catholic as very
tolerant and broad-minded, but scientific research has exploded the
fallacy that you can read a man's "character" in that fashion. I am
from a very long and wide experience as good a judge of character
as any, yet I was cheated out of $10,000, my life-savings, by a
lady I had known well for 20 years and considered of exceptionally
high character.

     My indictment of the clergy, however, is not so much an
ethical charge as a claim that their professional zeal forces them
into practices which are gravely prejudicial to the interests ()f 

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               22

                   HOW THE FAITH IS PROTECTED

the community. I will not be misunderstood. Priests are, as a body,
far from Being men of high character. They are not chosen for
character and do not take up the career as a rule from the motives
which the laity imagine. The skepticism which the majority of them
develop in one degree or other and the clandestine sex-relations
they enjoy in spite of vows engender a hypocrisy which poisons
character. But the question of character is not so much involved in
the charges I make here. Chiefly I accuse them of a comprehensive
conspiracy to get the truth suppressed in the organs of public
instruction, and when this is the suppression of truth which would
injure the Church they regard it as a virtue. Even on the positive
side, when they pour out, to use their own words against them, "a
Mississippi of lies," you have to remember their ethical theory of
mental reservation." The strict meaning of this is that you may, if
the person you are addressing has "no right to the truth" -- and no
one has a right to the kind of truth that hurts the Church -- use
words that he takes to mean something which you say in your own
mind that you do not mean. It is commonly interpreted as a license
to lie in the interest of the Church or the clergy. My own
professor of theology, a priest of great distinction in the
clerical body at London, lied so easily and unblushingly in the
interest of the Church that he clearly came to regard the line
between truth and untruth as of little importance. Another British
apologist, a man of generally stricter character, explains in a
little volume of advice to lay apostles that there are two uses of
facts. One is the logical way to use them -- simply to state them
correctly and let your hearer appraise them -- and the other is the
rhetorical use; by which he plainly means that when the facts
correctly stated tell against the Church or contradict its writers
you must make your statement of them innocuous or favorable to the
Church.


                           Chapter IV

                    SUGAR PLUMS FOR THE LOYAL

     But we waste time in any attempt to analyze the mind or the
conscience of churchmen. The ugly and important fact is that they
have secured such power over the organs of public instruction, even
in countries where they are a small minority, that it is
increasingly difficult to convey to the general public facts that
they ought to know. I have no abstract or Platonist veneration for
Truth, with a capital letter -- you will probably find this quoted
as a confession that I have no respect for truth -- nor, on the
other hand, am I a Pragmatist in the philosophical sense. In all my
work I aim to convey truth in the form of facts critically -- that
is to say, intellectually-ascertained and verified, but especially
facts of social significance or practical importance. That is the
general attitude of thoughtful Americans, and they now find that,
whereas fifty years of steady education and mental emancipation had
opened up a promise of a triumphant spread of it, the Black
International, in a vile cooperation with other corrupt interests,
threatens to destroy all the liberty that had been won. This side
of its work is of vital important in relation to the theme of the
present series of books: the question how it could keep the
allegiance of 15,000,000 Americans and the superficial respect of 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               23

                   HOW THE FAITH IS PROTECTED

the majority of the nation while during years it conspired with
greedy plotters against America and civilization. And when these
folk at the same time shout them-selves red in the face with
warnings against the diabolical machinations of Communists,
Bolsheviks (now, Mr. Churchill says, "our noble Russian friends"),
Atheists, Freemasons, and even Jews, the situation is nauseating.

     How it is to be remedied I do not know. The press can help no
longer, radio is in the hands of the enemy, politicians find the
arrangement can be used to their own profit, and the immense body
of university professor's sit silent or, in a few cases, join the
sycophants. It may be that our victory in the war will be followed
by a strong anti-clerical reaction. Do not build on it. The Church
will strain every nerve to keep the grim truth about its connection
with the war concealed, and it is now a first principle of
politicians of every shade that "we must not antagonize the
Catholic Church." What sort of state-structure they hope to build
on that rotten foundation, and how leaders of advanced parties can
follow this ignoble policy when wherever Fascism has triumphed
(outside Germany) the priests are getting their comrades shot by
the thousands, I do not know. I do my bit in the one field that is
left open to me.

     But we have not yet completed our description of the way in
which the Black International protects the belief in the amazing
bunch of ancient superstitions and medieval priestcraft which I
described in the last book. Let us understand at once that the need
of protection is not so great as one would be inclined to expect
after reading an account of the childish doctrines and tyrannical
rules. Here we may confine ourselves to such countries as America
and Britain, for the long account which I quoted of life in a
Catholic city dispenses me from any need to explain why people
cling to the faith, in such conditions. The illiterate mass are in
the condition of the Irishman who said, "Faith, if the Church said
it was Jonah who swallowed the whale it wouldn't trouble me" -- a
story my professor of theology often repeated, hilariously, in
class -- and the small comfortable minority are protected in their
privileged position by the priests.

     One has first to appreciate the social and psychological value
of the parish. All Churches have the advantage of providing this
satisfaction of one of the fundamental instincts, but the Catholic
clergy contrive to give a special force. The man who, finding other
social contacts to replace it or preferring isolation to listening
weekly to the mummery of the service and bleat of the sermon,
ceases to attend church is more sourly ostracized in a Catholic
than in any other sort of parish. He is a "bad Catholic," which is
as odious a label as the priest can fasten on him. His wife is kept
very sensitive of the gravity and disgrace of his condition, and
many links of old friendship may have to be broken. Few who have
taken an active part in what is called "the life of the parish"
would like to face the soured atmosphere of their neighborhood if
they left the Church. Thus for most of them the clerical warning to
avoid books and lectures that may start a doubt is hardly
necessary. The comfort, if not profit, of a hundred ties with
Catholic neighbors, the weekly meeting at the church-door, the 



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               24

                   HOW THE FAITH IS PROTECTED

social meetings and entertainments in the parish-hall or the
school, the feeling of membership of a large family and the
interest in its life and fortunes, are worth far more than the cold
and penalized Satisfaction of knowing the truth.

     For these folk who make up the greater part of the Catholic
body, religion is, as I said, not so much a matter of conviction as
of settled practices. They want no rupture or dislocation of the
routine. They are, in clerical language, the "practicing"
Catholics, and the way in which they are contrasted with the "non-
practicing" -- the conscientious and thoughtful folk who have
dropped out -- as virtue is contrasted with vice, is amusing.

     Every reader who belongs or has at any time belonged to a
religious congregation or parish knows how much this has to do with
membership of a church. To those who have not experienced it we
need only recall the furious zeal of the clergy to prevent the
provision of alternatives on Sundays. In Britain no theater may be
opened on Sundays, and concerts are provided only on special
conditions. Until a year ago no cinema was open. When, under
pressure of public opinion, a law was passed leaving it to local
option whether the cinemas should be opened on Sunday, the harsh
condition was attached that the proprietors must hand over the best
part of the profit to charity, and in most districts the clergy
organized their congregations in a spirited, and generally
successful, fight to prevent the opening. They did not trust a
large part of their own people to go to church if they had an
alternative, although sermons have been ruthlessly cut, brighter
music provided, and a Catholic is not compelled to attend more than
a 25-minute service on the Sunday morning.

     For large numbers there are additional advantages. The
Catholic store-keeper, medical man, journalist, teacher, employee
of a Catholic employer, etc., dare not miss attendance. Women and
girls, it is notorious, find it the opportunity of the week to show
off some new apparel or see what others wear. Many consider that
their matrimonial prospects are far brighter if they remain
attached to one of these socio-religious bodies. An author has left
it on record that he found the meeting in church a unique
opportunity to admire the rounder feminine curves. . . . It is, in
short, a very large error to suppose that a Catholic group or
parish is a body of men and women bound together simply by a common
belief in such doctrines as I described. Mainly it is a body of men
and women whom the accidents of life and education put on a common
path and the unpleasantness of quitting it seems to them not worth
the cold reward of an intellectual satisfaction. It is the obvious
absurdity of doctrines that compels many to face that
unpleasantness. When the religious statistics are closely examined
it will be seen that the Church which alone talks about conquering
America has in the last forty years lost more than its rivals.

     A special device of the Catholic clergy to restrict this large
leakage as far as possible is the organization of the laity in
special societies, guilds, fraternities, sororities, etc., so as to
keep them closer under clerical vigilance and control. I have
earlier explained how it is by means of these societies that the
priest turns the obligation to confess once a year into an 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               25

                   HOW THE FAITH IS PROTECTED

obligation to confess, every month. Best known and most powerful of
all in America is the Knights of Columbus, more than half a million
strong, which renders most important services to the clergy and
finds very substantial sums of money for them and the Pope. The
society was founded in 1882 mainly as a "fraternal benefit society"
or Catholic insurance company, and it still does a big and
profitable business in insurance. With the usual grotesque false
idea of the character of the European knights of the Middle Ages
Catholic men were enrolled in what professed to be a chivalrous and
romantic body of modern knights errant for the service of the
Church and of each other. They became a vast association of
Catholic men something in character between the Freemasons and the
German Shock Troops with a few features borrowed from the Gestapo.

     The article on them in the new Encyclopedia Americana is part
of the advertising scheme of the Roman Church which is a feature of
the work. It airily dismisses the much-discussed question of the
Secret oath of the Knights by saying: "Has no oath, only obligation
of secrecy," which, when you are referring to a Catholic
organization, is much like saying that a man "has no dog, only a
canine quadruped." The form of oath that is often attributed to
them seems to be a forgery based upon a crude idea of Catholic aims
but one would like to know in what form the obligation of secrecy
is imposed. A friend of mine, a distinguished Canadian, learned a
few years ago through an amusing hotel adventure, that the Quebec
Premier Tascherean had been initiated as a Knight but it must be
kept a deadly secret. Imagine the leonine roar of the Catholic
press if a president were discovered to have been secretly
initiated to Freemasonry! And what would be the position of
Tascherean if the question of the annexation or Anschluss of
Canada, for which the Knights are ready to work as they work for
the annexation of Mexico, ever became a live issue?

     However, the public action of the Knights is well known. What
is of interest here is that the organization is probably the most
valuable means that the Black International has in America for
holding grown-up and educated men to a profession of those medieval
speculation's which I described in the last book. It enlists
profit, patriotism, and piety in a harmonious regiment. To one-
third it says: Be a Knight and expand your bank-roll. To another
third: Be a Knight and break a lance for American (financial)
institutions on these Reds, Mexican bandits, Anarchists, Atheists,
Birth-controllers, etc. And to the genuine religious third it says:
Be a Knight in the service of Mary and the Lord. Why leave the
Church when it offers such golden, as well as gastroilomic,
opportunities? Since 1928 they have trained the young, as
"Columbian Squires" for the high function of Knights. One trusts
they have not to render all the services of the medieval squires
and pages.

     Seldes (The Vatican) tells us that during the few years before
1929, the period of the stormy courtship of Mussolini and the Pope,
there were amusing variations of the public policy of the Fascists.
At times when Mussolini was pressing and there was hope of an
agreement the Fascist police stopped young women on the streets and
painted marks on their stockings to which the skirts must be
lowered. When the Pope pressed and the hope of a bargain grew faint


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               26

                   HOW THE FAITH IS PROTECTED

-- well, one gathers that the legs were not daubed in public and
the low-water mark was much higher. The Church similarly adopts
itself, and for the more puritanical laymen of the American Church,
the men who cannot afford or do not like the social amenities and
robust services of the Knights, it has organized the gentler
society of the Holy Family. In this the wife may collaborate. An
important duty of theirs is to denounce wicked books, plays, and
pictures which have escaped the censor and are calculated to
corrode the foundations of American civilization. The sororities of
Catholic virgins are expected to cooperate in this, and the members
face the duty of seeing whether a film is really proper as firmly
as they face the intimate talk on sex in the confessional. Once I
saw a remarkably long queue of women outside the chief picture-
house in Chicago and learned that they were waiting to see a
picture which had so unpleasant a reputation that the police were
hourly expected to suppress it. Chicago was just then preparing for
a Eucharistic Congress and in mitigation of the subservience of the
civic authorities: to the Church the papers explained that one-
third of the citizens are devout Catholics. I concluded that the
bright-eyed women in the queue were mostly Catholics who wanted to
see if the film ought to be denounced to the police to save the
women and children of America.

     It is impossible here to name all the titles, decorations, and
festivities of the groups into which the faithful are Sorted; and,
indeed, you will soon begin to wonder why so many millions leave
the Church, if not why anybody leaves it. See, if you can, some
account of the vast net of activities covering the life of America
and centered in the offices of the National Catholic Welfare at
Washington. Everybody, from Catholic artists or scientists (number
not stated) to Catholic shoe-shiners, is organized and directed by
the clergy to discharge some function or other for Our Holy Mother
the Church. It is the American version of what in other countries
is called Catholic Action: the activity that invited Mussolini and
Hitler to overthrow the legitimate government in Spain, delivered
Vienna into the hands of the cardinal who grewed flowers in the
path of Hitler when he seized it, got the freethinking politicians
and bankers of Buenos Aires to give literally, a royal reception to
Cardinal Pacelli when he arrived to plot against democracy in South
America, filled the jails of Rio with the groans of tortured men,
put Petain in power in France and for the first time in many
centuries brought dishonor upon the country, betrayed Czecho-
Slovakia, paralyzes Canada today, etc., etc. In an earlier book I
quoted the Pope asking: "How could any fair-minded man say that the
Church ever interferes in polities?" In the same year a Catholic
writer in the Catholic fortnightly, the Revue des Deux Mendes,
opened his article with the sentence: "Rarely in history has the
Catholic factor had such influence as it has today on the political
movement throughout the world"; and he traced it in detail, and
with much joy, in Germany, Austria, Czecho-Slovakia, Spain, Italy,
Yugoslavia, Hungary, Rumania, and Japan.

     In America and Britain the chief aim of Catholic Action, which
specifically means action by the laity under clerical control, is
to carry out that poisoning of the wells of public information
which I have described, especially by intimidating the editors of
newspapers, the publishers of books, and librarians. To the outside


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               27

                   HOW THE FAITH IS PROTECTED

world this is presented as a very natural and innocent precaution
that nothing offensive to Catholics is published. One would imagine
at times, from the way Catholics talk, that the papers and books
were until a few year's ago filled with lies and libels against the
innocent Church, stories of escaped monks and nuns and debauches in
convents, unjust suspicions of plots on the part of the good
Jesuits and the intensely spiritual Vatican, and so on. This is, of
course, sheer non-sense. It is a mere face-saving excuse for the
unfortunate editors and publishers who have to submit to the most
brazen maneuvers of modern priestcraft. For the aim is not to
exclude lie's, which a paper easily detects and rejects, but to
secure the suppression of the truth about life in the Catholic
Church and the activities of the Vatican, which the public has a
right to know and publicists a duty to tell, and to compel papers
to publish untruthful statements to the advantage of the Church and
libraries to accept and circulate books that contain them. Since
the whole of these booklets illustrate that clerical maneuver I
need not here enlarge further on it.

     I have space to notice one more sugar plum, the sweetest of
all for the laity: the sale or awarding of Papal horrors, titles,
and decorations. Knights and counts are a dollar a dozen in Europe.
It is in the democratic atmosphere of America that these things
sparkle most. But I have dealt with them earlier. As a rule they
are, like titles in Britain, directly or indirectly bought. They
are a reward for "aims to the Church" or zeal in its service. I
notice in the British Catholic Who's Who an American named C.L.
Hearn who was for 10 years Supreme Knight of the Knights of
Columbus. I do not know whether he has sunk into the grave under
the burden of his honors -- I find no mention of him in Who's Who
in America or the Encyclopedia Americana -- but it seems that he
was a Knight of St. Gregory, a Commander with the Star and Grand
Cross, a Count of the Papal Court, and a Privy Chamberlain of the
Sword and Cape. I do not know whether he had a nice salary to
sustain their dignities in a democratic world but I gather that on
behalf of the valorous Knights he took some fat checks to Rome. But
see an earlier book for these supreme rewards to the faithful
laity.

     Do not, in fine, lose sight of the fact that the boast that
the Church has 20,000,000 or 25,000,000 followers in America is
just part of the big bluff of the Black International. No one dare
make an actual inquiry, such as was done 30 years ago in London,
how many people do in fact attend Catholic churches regularly,
which is the only test of membership of the Church. I have shown
that 15,000,000 is a generous figure to assign yet that of the
living population of America something like double that number have
been baptized in the Church. That the vast organization of priests,
monks, nuns, journalists, teachers, paid and amateur agents, now
the most wealthy religious body in the world, should, with such a
scheme of threats and attractions as I have here described, succeed
in keeping about one-half of the mass, predominantly at the lowest
cultural level of those who by birth and upbringing ought to be
Catholics is scarcely a miracle. But the point of chief interest
here is that the mechanism for securing loyalty or checking
disloyalty is essentially Fascist and illustrates once more that
close affinity of the Black International with the corrupt powers 
that darken the earth.

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               28




                        27 page printout

    Reproducible Electronic Publishing can defeat censorship.

          This file, its printout, or copies of either
          are to be copied and given away, but NOT sold.

          Bank of Wisdom, Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                          ****     ****

Edited by E. Haldeman-Julius

THE BLACK INTERNATIONAL                 No. 18

              THE ARTISTIC STERILITY OF THE CHURCH

                  HOW THE CHURCH STUPEFIES FOLK
                      BY CRUDE EMOTIONALISM

                        by Joseph McCabe

                  HALDEMAN-JULIUS PUBLICATIONS
                     GIRARD  -- : --  KANSAS

                          ****     ****

   CHAPTER

     I    The Alleged Beautiful Services ...................... 1

    II    There never was a Catholic art ...................... 7

   III    Few Poets and Vapid Hymns .......................... 13

    IV    Masses Composed by Skeptics ........................ 19

     V    Why a dead Language is Used in the Liturgy ......... 23


                          ****     ****

                            Chapter I

                 THE ALLEGED BEAUTIFUL SERVICES

     In approaching this subject it will be useful to state again
the angle from which I write the present series of booklets. It is
to show that the scandalous action of the Vatican and most of its
national hierarchies which I traced in the first series of booklets
was just what you would expect if you know the Church of Rome. It
is not a religious body like any other, and the venerable antiquity
of which it is so proud merely recalls, to the informed mind, the
violence and unscrupulousness of the methods by means of which it
has survived. Its path through the ages is marked, not by the
flowering of new cultures or new civilizations, but by the graves
of rival religions and of masses of rebels. It consists essentially
of a Black International which in every age wages an economic
struggle for survival and has, in view of the absurdity of the
creed on which it lives, to use violence and deception to hold 



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               1

              THE ARTISTIC STERILITY OF THE CHURCH

together the body which supports it. However many million devout
laymen and however many thousand sincere priests there may be in
the world this is its broad structure, and only when you see that
can you understand its proved action in modern life.

     Some American apologists have pleaded in excuse for their very
un-american efforts to suppress criticism that the critics would
like to drive a wedge between the Catholic laity and their priests.
The man who could succeed in doing this would render an outstanding
service to the country. We say that the international army to which
their priests belong is Fascist. The name "Fascist" was, it
appear's, taken from a bastard Italian word (fascio) which means a
bunch or a group, but it goes back ultimately to the emblem of
authority, the axe and the rods, in the ancient Roman army. That
emblem is so characteristic of the Roman Church that, we saw, even
while. it protested in a dozen tongues -- English, French, German,
etc. -- that it is now tolerant and humane it still claimed in
Latin its possession of the axe and the rods. In an age when the
Fascist banner seemed destined to float over three continents it
threw off the mask of meekness and openly joined the aggressors.

     This involved a larger use than ever of its second weapon,
suppression of truth and mendacity, in the lands that were not yet
conquered, and I have endeavored to expose this and enable the
reader to understand the Church. In the world at large it is,
instead of being the impressive institution it represents in
America, a tragic-comic spectacle. If you grant it the 250,000,000
subjects it claims today, one-third of these are men and women who
curse it in their hearts and go to church only under the shadow of
its bloody emblem of the axe and the rods, and more than a third of
the remainder are either children or illiterates. The only point of
serious interest is how it keeps in its fold in America and Britain
so many out of the teeming millions who have come from less
educated lands, and I have, I think, explained this. There remain,
however, two elements of explanation that are so frequently claimed
that we must examine them. The first is the fairly common opinion
that the Church of Rome appeals to the heart and, the emotions, far
more than any other Church does, and this, it is thought, distracts
the mind from the intellectual absurdity or moral repulsiveness of
its doctrines. The second is the familiar cry -- the parrot-cry,
one might justly call it -- that it "does good," and on a scale
that ought to impress even the skeptic.

     Postponing the question whether the Church has rendered a
service to art itself we may consider first the sensuous appeal
which it makes, and against Protestant writers confesses that it
makes, to the general body of the faithful. That this is one
element of it, success in inducing millions to continue in the
profession of beliefs which are as incongruous in our modern world
as an iron-clad knight would be, we fully admit. Statistics, it is
true, do not show that the sensuous services give the Catholic
Church any advantage over the leading Protestant Churches except in
a preponderance of female church-goers over males, but in fact a
high proportion of Catholics would tell you that the character of
the services attract them. It is, part of my work to warn folk
against generalizing from one or a few cases, but it may be of
interest to give one. I have a neighbor, an elderly woman, a bombee


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               2

              THE ARTISTIC STERILITY OF THE CHURCH

of shattered nerves, who was brought up a strict Roman Catholic.
Intelligence and education poor. She is ready at all times to join
her son (a full apostate) in cursing the Pope and the priests, and
she incurs eternal damnation cheerfully most Sunday mornings by
refusing to go to mass. But she often does go, and she explains
that it is because she "likes the services." I should add that she
has a dull and lonely life.

     What is important here is not the type but the psychological
factor. We must not exaggerate it. About a third of the Catholic
body discharge only the minimum of obligation and attend a "low"
mass (without music) on Sundays. They take no part whatever in it
and do not understand a word of the priest's Latin gabbling; and
instead of having any sensuous or artistic enjoyment they just
kneel uncomfortably and impatiently until it is over. The church
itself which they attend is "artistic" only to a low taste, like
the "best room" in the apartment of workers or small-middle-class
folk with more money than education. A few of these may also attend
the evening service. It is nearly all in Latin and they take no
part in it, but the sanctuary is gay with surplices and silk, the
altar ablaze, the service and choral, and the sermon usually short.
If the alternative is anything like that of the old lady I have
quoted, to be left alone in a drab room, one usually prefers to be
"a Catholic." Remember that it is cheap -- two cents or a nickel.
These folk are not interested in doctrines. The "real presence" of
Jesus on the altar, which seems almost grotesque when you coldly
dissect the dogma as a theologian does, is vague in their minds.
The church is "the house of God," and they do not make the
theologian's subtle distinction between God and Jesus or between
the human and divine persons in the "hyostatic union" of the
theological Jesus.

     This one-third of the Catholic body is, numerically, the chief
source of leakage. To them the religion is, as I said, a practice
or a sentiment, not a belief. Where there is no particular
emotional response to the rhetoric of the pulpit and the weekly
paper about the Holy Faith and Holy Father and the devouring thirst
of the world and the devil to destroy them they are easily drawn
off. The men and youths and many of the young women secede as soon
as they get a live faith and ideal like Socialism. Others just
drift away if the general atmosphere is non-Catholic. In a Catholic
country these folk are held by the gaiety of the show. The wine-
shop and the church are the two bright spots in their heavy lives.

     The nice-minded skeptics who resent this coupling of the wine-
shop and the church, who (with no knowledge of Catholic life) say
that "religion" is the real uplift in these people's hearts and it
is wicked to try to remove it, may be recommended to read some such
book as Prof. J.L. Mecham's Church and State in Latin America
(1934). He has the very correct professorial attitude -- you try so
hard to stand up that you fall backward occasionally -- especially
as his university (North Carolina) publishes the book. It is mostly
concerned with history but incidentally it tell's Some painful
truths about the Church in those Catholic countries, to which the
Catholic likes to refer you if he thinks that you know no more than
he does about them. The clergy are admitted to be, as a body,
sensual, lazy, and grossly ignorant. The bishops are fanatically 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               3

              THE ARTISTIC STERILITY OF THE CHURCH

conservative and more attentive to their political interferences
than to the moral and spiritual welfare of the mass of the people.
The Indians, the vast majority of the population of Latin America,
are at the lowest level of ignorance and superstition, ready at any
time to serve the political purposes of the hierarchy, though often
barely Christian in religion and permitted by the priests the
wildest license. The Church festivals are orgies. In fact,
Professor Mecham approve ugly quotes from another authority,
"Bacchus is the one absolute and essential God. Sex-morals are as
usual, inadequately and therefore untruthfully discussed in the
book, but I have elsewhere shown that the general attitude is such
that priests and monks indulge in the most open and ingenuous
fashion. A more candid, and worse picture will be found in Braga
and Grubb's work, based on intimate knowledge, The Republic of
Brazil; and for a concrete richly-informed picture of the state of
the people and the brutal exploitation of them by unscrupulous
priests see Alan Hillgarth's novel The Black Mountain. And remember
that these books were written and published before the victory of
clerical Fascism in Latin America. In most republics the situation
is worse today.

     To these 60,000,000 or so Catholic worker's and peasants of
Latin America add those of Cuba and the Philippines, the rural
parts and small-town populations of Italy, Spain, Portugal, and the
Portuguese. French, and Belgian colonies. I gave an authentic
picture of life in such regions in Book IV of this series. The
entire body of Catholics coming into this category are considerably
more than half the whole number of the Pope's subjects; and you may
not be disposed to put the majority of the Catholics of Eire,
Poland, Hungary, Mexico, Quebec, Slovakia, etc., on a much higher
level. Then remember that half the remaining Catholics, of the
world are children, and that half the adult Catholics of the United
States come from some such environment and to a great extent
reproduce their old atmosphere in American cities. The conception
of them -- as so many tens of millions of simple folk elevated for
an hour above their daily level by beautiful services in which they
absorb themselves every Sunday and Holy Day is as ingenuous as the
Sunday School idea of George Washington.

     As I said, the Catholicism of this larger half of the subjects
of the Black International no more requires study than does that of
children. It is an ingrained attitude or set of practices,
protected from interference from the rebel who appears here and
there by the power that the priest's have: a power which in all
Catholic countries Fascism has made absolute. To an extent their
minds are drugged on Sundays and Saints' Days, but it is hardly
necessary in their case. It is at the higher levels that the
intellectually depressing effect of the Catholic services becomes
important, and the more artistic they are the more effective the
opiate.

     Two illustrations of the truth of this at once occur. I have
not the Catholic Who's Who for America but the situation is much
the same as in Britain, and I have already pointed out that,
confining ourselves as far as possible to the same cultural level
converts to the Church from the world of art are three or four
times as numerous as from the scientific world. It would be quite 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               4

              THE ARTISTIC STERILITY OF THE CHURCH

natural to suggest that artists feel the charm of the beautiful
services more than scientists, but it is a poor compliment to pay
to any artist of distinction to suggest that he will enter a Church
and on his knees make a solemn declaration of literal belief in all
its doctrines, repeated one by one, just because its churches and
services are artistic. He is free at any time to attend the
services and, if he feels inclined, see a pretty symbolism in them,
but if he calls himself a Catholic he in the same breath denies
that he takes a symbolic view of the services and doctrines. That
is a comprehensive and deadly heresy in theology; though, of
course, we are aware that a priest will, to secure or retain the
name of a distinguished artist for the Church, not press him about
his beliefs any more than he will be too inquisitive about a
wealthy man's amorous adventures.

     The truth is, however, that it is not the higher artistic
sensitiveness but the comparatively lower intellectual vitality or
equipment of the artist that explains why he is willing to make a
profession of the creed I described in an earlier book. Probably in
most cases these artist-converts flatter themselves that they have
one sound reason which may be classed as intellectual. They are
convinced the Roman Church has been, and is, a great inspirer of
high art, and this at least predisposes them to endorse a creed
that, in marked contrast to science, has had, they say, so
beneficent an influence. Catholic literary artists have written
this, and I have heard them say that art and the love of beauty are
in danger of perishing in our drab, cold, materialistic age and
they must rally to the Church as the best guarantee of survival.
G.K. Chesterton, who when his earlier good nature was dissolved in
the acid of the Holy Faith wrote of its critics as "mad dogs," was
strong on this point. It is, as I will show presently, a sheer
fallacy. But the artist who enters the Church in such a frame of
mind loses any inclination to criticize. He has taken an opiate.

     The second illustration is the preponderance of women over men
in the richer and more artistic Catholic churches. Here I rely
neither on impressions nor on the common belief that women are more
religious than men. In the less artistic Protestant churches there
is no material disproportion of the sexes, and it is not notable in
the poorer Catholic districts. A Strict census of church-goers,
spread over six months, in the city of London (England) in 1903
proved this. In the whole city (6,250,000 people) 372,264 men and
607,257 women attended church. But the disparity of the sexes was
far and away the greatest in the artistic churches of the rich West
End of London. In two Anglican churches there were 160 and 249 men
and 886 and 1,034 women. In three Romanist churches there were 267,
276, and 237 men and 1,105, 807, and 701 women. In Methodist and
Baptist churches in a poor quarter there were 3,336 men to 4,127
women. It is clear what conclusion we must draw from such figures.
Educated men are far less disposed to let their intellectual life
be stupefied by emotional satisfaction. Religion, again, is a
practice or an emotion rather than a belief.

     The Church professes that it appeals to the emotions only as
a preliminary appeal to the intellect. That is clearly false. It
appeal's to the senses because if they find an attractiveness in
the services less demand need be made upon the intelligence of the 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               5

              THE ARTISTIC STERILITY OF THE CHURCH

worshiper. To contrast the Protestant version of Christianity with
the Roman as cold and unemotional is absurd. The Protestant service
makes a very powerful appeal to the emotions of a believer. The
prayers are heavily emotional and are not muttered in a tongue that
any of the laity understand. The congregation silently takes part
in them, and the emotions stirred are then released in the
community-singing of the hymns, of which there is very little In
the usual Catholic service. It would not be inaccurate to say that
the Protestant service appeals to the emotions through the ideas or
doctrines which are embodied in the prayers, hymns, and sermons,
while the Catholic service aims at a direct gratification of the
senses by florid music, flowers, candles, colored silks and white
robes, ornate altars, incense, stained glass, and a general
artistic scheme according to the cultural quality of the
congregation of each particular church.

     In this sense it stupefies the intelligence or dulls its
alertness and critical tendency by ensuing this gratification of
the senses or, in wealthier churches, of the esthetics sense. A
friend of theirs once gave me the broad explanation of the
Catholicism of Belloc and Chesterton that they regard a Catholic
church as a center of light, warmth, and color in an materialistic
world. One might carry the analysis further. One does not today
suffer economically and socially by joining the Catholic Church as
one does by quitting it, as Chesterton found. Soon after his
conversion my mail brought me, doubtless because some careless
person had simply taken a list of names and addresses from Who's
Who, an appeal by a group of important Catholics for a subscription
to a large fund to provide Chesterton with a basic income for the
rest of his life. But we have in an earlier book considered the
Church as a mutual aid society.

     The field here is so large, the variety of types so great --
from Seymour Hicks or Charles Laughton to the Irish dock-laborers
or the Italian street-vendors of New York, from St. Patrick's
Cathedral to the dauby, garnishes of a poor Polish chapel -- that
it is difficult to cover the facts usefully with a formula. The
title I have given this chapter is the one usually selected by
critics of the Church. It is valid if by "stupefying" we mean that
the emphasis of faith is deliberately transferred from the
intellectual confrontation of doctrines to the enjoyment of
sensuous experiences as a discharge of religious duty. A writer who
was intimate, and on the whole sympathetic, to Italian life, Axel
Menthe, has said that most of the uneducated or poorly educated
Catholics rarely thought about Jesus or anything but the cult of
Mary and the saints. For the majority everywhere the doctrinal
ideas retire behind a vividly colored screen of emblems, symbols,
statues, pictures, and material rites and ceremonies. It is one of
the reasons why those doctrinal ideas, which seem so crude and
outrageous when you consider them apart from the churches services,
linger in a world to which they are as alien as the ten-gallon hat
or the crinoline.







                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               6

              THE ARTISTIC STERILITY OF THE CHURCH

                           Chapter II

                 THERE NEVER WAS A CATHOLIC ART

     That, a Catholic reader would say, is such nonsense that it is
impudent to ask people to read it. Better informed folk will say,
with a smile, that it is an uncontrolled expression of my anti-
Papal complex or at the best a paradox. Not a bit of it. It is a
plain statement of fact, and my habitual readers will know that I
have very closely studied the history of art, especially during the
Middle Ages, and discussed it in earlier works. Let me first make
a distinction which is elementary yet is quite commonly overlooked,
and not infrequently by writers on art.

     When you pass along the streets of a city you notice that,
generally speaking, banks and insurance corporations have more
artistic buildings than the others. Is there some artistic
inspiration in the money-business, something that you would call
financial art? You know the answer. They just employ art more than
other concerns because it pays them to do this. Never mind for the
moment what their conception of art is. It may be block glass and
chromium steel or a gothic sky-scraper. The point is that the
diverse artistic effort in a collection of buildings expresses the
resources of the business and the particular utility it finds in
the employment of art. Well, the richest employer of artists is and
always's was the Catholic Church, and no other business in the
world derives so much profit from the employment of art as it does.
It no more inspires the art than a funeral-furnisher does. If there
is anything in its doctrines that may in any sense be said to
inspire art it is just in those bastard dogmas in which the
original Christian ideas are mixed with Greek or Roman mythology or
medieval barbarism.

     The history of Catholic art, even as it is known to every
educated man, confirms this, and the more closely you study it the
clearer the truth becomes. There was no art in the service during
the first three centuries. Naturally, says the apologist. The
faithful were fugitives from the police, holding services that were
necessarily simple in the catacombs. . . . Rubbish. There were only
a few years out of the 250 (from Nero to Constantine) when they had
to dip underground, They hated and feared art. It was what the
devil employed to make paganism attractive to keep the Greeks and
Romans out of the Church. What happened in the 4th Century, when
the Roman Church got freedom and wealth, was not that it began to
inspire an art but that it began to rob the pagans of their art,
The official Book of the Popes, composed in Rome from the early
Middle Ages onward, has preserved an extraordinary list of the
artistic furniture (silver, altars, statues, etc.) that the Emperor
Constantine lifted from the pagan temples of Rome and donated to
the new Christian churches. And when, decade after decade, the
Romans still clung to the old religion, the Christian leaders, who
were now fully-pledged Fascists since they had taken over the axe
and the rods, emptied the gods and goddesses, the holy water and
incense, the vestments and ritual, from the temples into the
Christian conventicles on the other side of the street and nailed
up the doors of the temples.



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               7

              THE ARTISTIC STERILITY OF THE CHURCH

     The eastern Churches were still so rooted in the anti-artistic
tradition that they generally preferred to burn the temples and all
their artistic paraphernalia. Pagan temples were not meeting-houses
in which folk sat or stood in rows with long faces chanting
doggerel or listening to some professional teacher of virtue. They
were art-museums. Those gay old stories of Zeus and Aphrodite, of
Apollo and Athene, had in four or five centuries "inspired" a
wonderful art. In a century or two sculpture, painting, and
architecture had made more progress than the more ancient world had
made in 3,000 years. And it was mostly stored in the temples for
the people to admire and enjoy. From about 390 to 420 most of these
went up in smoke. Priests and monks, with the new Fascist powers
that the bishops had wheedled from the emperors, led mob's to the
attack, and all over the Greek world there was such a holocaust of
art as Goths and Vandals never perpetrated.

     At least, the apologist might say, the Roman Church did better
than the Greek. It preserved and Christianized the art. To what
extent we need not inquire. The point here is that it did not
inspire a new art but, in the words of one of the leading art-
historians, Luebke, "put on the corporeal garment of ancient and
decaying art." If you prefer me to quote a Catholic historian of
art, Dr. F. Von Reber says in his History of Medieval Art (p. 73)
that "the general debasement of art and the conceptions of
Christianity worked together to destroy that perfection of outward
appearance which is the vital principle of all art." In any case,
the zeal for art, in the corrupt Roman Church of the 4th Century
and Europe passed into the artistic hell of the Dark Age.

     I have often illustrated the way in which the Black
International has succeeded in recent years in poisoning the wells
of public information by references to the latest edition of the
Encyclopedia Britannica. The boast of British Catholics that they
"revised" it is only too true. Amongst other changes notice that
"Dark Ages," on which there had previously been no article, now bag
a short notice from one of the professors of history of a second-
rate British university. I suppose they had to pass over Oxford and
Cambridge to find a man who could please Catholics. This man
solemnly says, with all the superciliousness of his school that the
phrase Dark Ages -- being a continuous period we ought to call the
Dark Age -- used to be applied by writers who judged life by the
classical standard of art and letters, to the period from the 5th
to the 15th Century. He seems to be unaware that it was the Father
of Catholic History, Cardinal Baronius, who first used the phrase;
that, it does not simply designate the scarcity of art and letters
but of all civilization; and that no responsible historian carries
it as far as the 15th Century. It is, he says, now "obsolete";
whereas it is fully vindicated in the greatest historical work in
the English language, the Cambridge Medieval History. The only
sense in which it could now be used, he says, is that the period,
has loft us only a very scanty and poor historical literature to
inform us about it; and he does not reflect that this is precisely
one of the symptoms of its degradation. But it is wrong to apply so
opprobrious's a word to "one of the great constructive periods in
human activity." This man is President of the British Royal
Historical Society!



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               8

              THE ARTISTIC STERILITY OF THE CHURCH

     I must refer the interested reader to other works in which he
can read about the total collapse of the fine Greek-Roman
civilization and the five or six centuries of moral, social, legal,
political, and economic, as well as cultural, debasement that
followed. It is enough that art was dead, except amongst the anti-
Papal Ostrogoths and Lombards of North Italy, until, in the 11th
Century, Greek art was introduced into Germany by a royal marriage,
and it was not until a century later that Europe generally began to
cultivate art. Professor Stenton is right that this was "one of the
great constructive periods in human activity." He merely forgot to
add that this was wherever the Roman Church did not exercise power.
Under the Moslem, from Spain to Eastern Persia, the earth shone
with a brilliant art from the 8th Century onward.

     But the great art of the Middle Ages! That is what the
apologist and the artistic converts to the Church have in mind: the
Gothic cathedrals of Europe, the superb paintings and statues, the
work in gold, silver, and bronze, the tapestries and stained
windows, the lace's and embroideries. Certainly a period of superb
artistic creativeness, and because a half or more of the works of
art then created are religious the apologists and the religious-
minded artists clap their hands and cry: See what our religion
inspired, see what the world has lost in discarding it!

     I will not be tempted to reply that according to very many
art-authorities of our time we, especially atheistic France, have
created a greater art, because I must confess to an incurable
enthusiasm for medieval cathedrals, paintings, and sculpture. But
this art, is just as inspired in its "profane" as in its "Sacred"
achievements: as great in its civic halls as in its cathedrals, in
its painted Venuses and sinful princes as in its Madonnas and
saints. And when you call the sacred part of it Catholic art,
because it represents ideas or personalities of Catholic theologY,
remember the elementary distinction between an art inspired by
Catholicism and one merely employed by the Church. Nearly every
modern historian of art or expert on the Renaissance has pointed
out those facts. I have quoted a dozen of them in earlier works on
the subject, of which a summary is given in Little Blue Book No.
1136, Medieval Art and the Church. Even Lord Leighton, the
distinguished British painter and head of the Pre-Raphaelite
School, says that during the early development of Italian painting
the Church was a blight on the art and that it attained greatness
only when the humanism of the Renaissance began to replace religion
as its inspiration. (Addresses Delivered to the Students of the
Royal Academy, 1896).

     The Catholic artists and men and women of artistic
sensitiveness but very little knowledge of the broad history of art
or the lives and opinions of the great medieval artists feel that
in this field the Church will find its most powerful argument. It
is very little use asking them to study the leading modern
authorities on the subject. They just kneel in rapture in a
medieval cathedral or before a sacred painting, and because we no
longer build such cathedral's or paint such pictures they say: Here
is the glorious flower of the Catholic spirit. They would say just
the same about a fresco by Pinturicchio (a skeptical, dissipated
artist employed by one of the most flagrantly immoral of the Popes 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               9

              THE ARTISTIC STERILITY OF THE CHURCH

to paint his, the Pope's, mistress as the Virgin Mary) in the
Vatican, or a painting by Paolo Veronese (who was dragged before
the Inquisition for the irreverence of his art) or Filippo Lippi (a
loose friar who seduced a nun and lived for years with her while he
painted beautiful religious pictures). They would glow with fervor
and pride before one of the great religious paintings of Rubens and
then (I hope) blush with a sense of sin before the same artist's
"Venus and Adonis," which is equally "inspired." They encourage the
police to prevent the reproduction and sale today of the classical
studies in which most of these great artists revelled, and then
they have copies exhibited everywhere of the religious pictures
which the rich churches and convents of Italy commissioned them to
paint. The same bishop or cardinal would employ the same artist to
paint a Leda and the Swan for his dining-room or library and a Holy
Family for his chapel. The artist did equally fine work in both
fields -- no expert has ever claimed that there is less
"inspiration" in the profane than in the sacred work of Renaissance
artists -- but the religious market was much the larger and richer.

     The all-pervading fallacy of all this slush about Catholicism
and Renaissance art is the supposition, which too many American
historians now encourage, that the later Middle Age (say about 1150
to 1550) was a period of general piety and loyalty to the Church's
commands. If that were so, the modern "psychological" historian
would have a nice problem in explaining how that was just the
period of the worst and most protracted degradation of the Papal
Court, and why the one period of great art in Rome itself coincides
with the most openly immoral and skeptical stretch of medieval
Church history. Not only, all the leading authorities on the
Renaissance (Burckhardt, Symonds, Hudson, and the Cambridge
History) but the special Catholic authority on the period, Dr.
Ludwig Pastor, make this quite clear. In respect of cruelty,
dishonor, injustice to the weaker, and especially sexual freedom
and sodomy, it was a more vicious age than any period of ancient
civilization that was ever half as long.

     A second fundamental fallacy, which well illustrates the
difference between the artistic and the scientific mind and the
greater readiness of the former to accept the claims of the Church,
is the lack of testing and verification, in plain English, the
failure of the artist to check his impression by testing it from
various angles. If it occurs to a scientific man that a certain
agency is the cause of a particular phenomenon he holds his tongue
until he has convinced himself by a series, of check-studies that
it explains the whole phenomenon and no other agency does.
Scientific method is in this just the clarification of common-
sense. Applied to our present subject it would inquire whether an
artist is more inspired in sacred thin in profane subjects and
whether and to what extent great religious works of art were
produced by men of little or no religious feeling. We saw how
ludicrously the protagonist of Catholic art fails to do this. But
the common-sense inquiry would go much further. Was the European
Renaissance the only great, or the greatest, period of artistic
creation? And was there a religious inspiration in the other great
periods, Greek, Chinese, Persian, and Arab? The plain conclusion
emerges that if a man is a great artist it does not make any 



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               10

              THE ARTISTIC STERILITY OF THE CHURCH

difference to his inspiration whether he has to paint a branch of
cherry blossoms or a Buddha, a courtesan or a Virgin Mary, a
peasant or a Christ. The Parthenon is the greatest religious
building that was ever raised, and Pheideas its creator, was a
skeptic.

     Of the medieval cathedral in particular I have written much
elsewhere and must be content with two points. It is obvious that
if we have here a case of religious inspiration it must have been
in the architects. But they are unknown. I cannot find that any
writer on art has tried to compile even a short list or a
biographical study of them, and the only such architect of whom I
have found definite information, the architect of Speyer cathedral,
was a roistering irreligious German bishop who was just as good at
building a military fort or a castle. The second point is that
modern experts on the Gothic style never notice religious
inspiration, in their studies. The development of the style, on
utilitarian as well as aesthetic lines, was spread over two
generations and mainly occurred in the most frivolous and
licentious region of France. The chief significance of it is that
wealth was at this period rapidly expanding in Europe, and the
clergy and monks got the most of it and wanted fine churches. It
was a sound investment.

     Another obvious cheek on this superficial Catholic theory is
to inquire why great art so notably decayed after the 16th Century.
In that pretentious collection of essays by American apologists,
Catholic Action (2 vols., 1935), there is a section on "Catholic
Action and Culture." The artistic convert who looks to it for what
he believes to be the grandest argument for the Church, its
inspiration of art, will be bitterly disappointed. The writer
dismisses it in a few colorless lines, and the sterilization of
Catholic art after the 16th Century is airily explained by saying
that "we have not yet recovered" from the blight which the
Reformation brought upon art. If the writer does not know that
French painting (Poussin, Lorraine, Watteau, Greuze, Fragmard,
etc.) and British painting only became great after the Reformation
and was almost entirely humanist or naturalist, while Spanish and
Italian art died though the countries were hermetically sealed
against Protestant influence, he ought not to 'Mention the word
art.

     Looking for some serious recent Catholic reply to my question
why, if the Catholic creed inspires art, it so conspicuously failed
to do so in Italy, Spain, and Portugal when the Renaissance was
over, although the Catholicism of those countries became stronger
than ever, I find only two French works. The first, L art religieux
apres le Concile de Trent (1932) by Emile Male, is a large work on
religious art after the Council of Trent." It does not admit on my
contention. For Spain and the Netherlands (steeped in Spanish
culture) it reminds us of Velasquez, Murillo and Rubens. Yes: but
they belong essentially to the Renaissance, which was late in
Spain, and after them, Spanish art was vapid until the skeptical
days of Goya (a quite blasphemous painter). As great painters of
Spain and Italy the author gives Montanes, Pedro de Mena, Minana,
Crespi, Dolci, Giordano, Caroselli. ... I hope you have heard of
them.


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               11

              THE ARTISTIC STERILITY OF THE CHURCH

     The second book, La decandence de I'art sacre (1931), by A.
Cingria (a Catholic) grants my whole contention. It is enough to
translate the title, "The decadence of 'Sacred art." The kind of
question that the author sets out to answer is: "Why do the
majority of Christians now like ugliness"? He doesn't know. Let us
put him right to some extent. They do not like ugliness except in
the sense that a church in a poor uneducated district naturally
reflects the poor taste of the worshipers. But Catholics would be
only too pleased to have great art once more if they could get it.
The Roman Church in America is many times as rich as the Italian
Church was during the Renaissance and would pay ten or a hundred
times as much as a medieval church or monastery did. They cannot
get it. They have to import pictures from Spain, Italy, and
Germany; and we should smile at the idea that the non-Catholic
atmosphere of America prevents a Catholic artist from being
inspired by Catholic ideas. The Church in Germany until a few years
ago was as rich as the American. The Church in Spain and Spanish
America is rich. But in the debauched monasteries of Germany and
South America, where the Renaissance atmosphere of drink and sexual
license is richly reproduced, no great art is produced.

     Quebec is a medieval area with ideal Catholic conditions. Its
Church is so rich that it is as zealous against Communism as Wall
Street is. Cardinal Villeneuve, defending illegal acts against
critics of the Church by the Catholic mayor of Montreal, said that
above the laws of Canada is "the Law of Nature"; in the same sense
as the Church overrides all modern civil law and claims to put folk
to death on religious grounds. The taint of Protestantism never
reached Quebec. Its people are poor and fanatical: its priests are
rich, ignorant, and intolerant. But did you ever see any work of
art that was produced in Quebec?

     This artistic argument for the Church is futile because even
if we could admit that it inspired great art in the later Middle
Ages yet must add that it has no such inspiration today there does
not seem to be much gain to the Pope. The claim is clearly
rhetorical. Every man with what we may call average information
knows that the production of great art is not continuous but is
richest in certain definite periods that last a few centuries and
then decay. There have been three in the history of China, three in
that of Persia, two in the long history of ancient Egypt, one in
Greece, one in the Moslem world, and so on. Europe got the
conditions for its second golden age of art in the Middle Ages. It
came to a close like all other such ages, though it began and ended
later in France, England, and Spain than in Italy. It took so very
largely a religious form because the Church was the richest
employer and in so sensual and voluptuous an age it had a more
extensive use than ever for art. This is what most of the chief
historians of European art say. And remember always something which
it is not their business to say but is of vital relevance to the
Catholic claim of religious inspiration: that there is not in the
whole history of religion, as far as we have positive knowledge or
even ground for suspicion, so profound and general a religious
corruption -- of Popes, cardinals, archbishops, bishops, priests,
monk, and nuns -- as there was during the age (1300-1600) of
supreme Catholic art. That nut wants some cracking.



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               12

              THE ARTISTIC STERILITY OF THE CHURCH

                           Chapter III

                    FEW POETS AND VAPID HYMNS

     Two of the arts, literature and music, deserve special
consideration. Both arts had their richest efflorescence after the
Reformation; both ought to be of special value in the service of
religion; and, while the plastic arts are scarcely suitable for
illustrating most of the Catholic doctrines, literature and music
are much better suited for the expression of ideas. In regard to
literature, moreover, we have a much broader test of the Catholic
claim. Even most folk with a fair general culture have to look to
the verdict of experts for an appreciation of painting or
sculpture. How many ever saw a picture, or a copy of a picture, by
one of the Spanish or Italian artists whom Male presses upon us as
"great painters" who worthily sustained the tradition of Catholic-
inspired art? How many, when they see a collection of reproductions
of the religious work of, say, Raphael, Pinturicchio, L. da Vinci,
Lippi, Botticelli, Veronese, and Murillo, have the least idea which
of these men really had deep religious feeling and which had not?
On the other hand, most people have a wider knowledge of books and
authors, and every Catholic knows, and ought to have some idea of
the artistic value of, the kind of literature which above all ought
to show Catholic inspiration, the hymns that are sung in church.

     In regard to literature as a whole I have repeatedly pointed
out that Christendom did not produce a book that in the general
opinion of cultivated men and women could be called "great" between
Augustine's City of God (written about 412) and Dante's Trilogy
(about 1300). No one, in fact, now reads Augustine's work as
literature, and Dante's work, to which Goethe and other critic's of
the highest rank denied the title of greatness, has rather an
esoteric circle of readers. Let us, however, pass them as great
Catholic literature. It is far more notable, when you are
discussing the question of religious inspiration, that the Catholic
world failed to produce a single work of high rank during the
intervening 900 years. Of what other civilization since the Greeks
created a great literature can you say that?

     We saw the apologist for the Dark Age, Prof. Stenton,
admitting that the stretch of seven centuries after the Fall of
Rome was "dark" in the sense that it has left us very little
literature to throw light upon it. Who ever heard of a civilized
period of seven centuries without a literature? It wrote books, of
course. The whole output is preserved in the Migne Library, but if
you cut out the theological works which not even a priest now reads
-- Gregory, Anselm, Bernard, etc. -- you have a thin collection of
weird treatises and chronicles, mostly written in a barbaric (often
grotesquely ungrammatical) Latin, that makes you smile at the
apologists for the Dark Age.

     From about 1100 a very different literature began: troubadour
songs, ballads, epics, light stories, and so on. Yes, but it was so
pervasively licentious and crude in its moral sentiments that the
Church, when it began to use its axe and rods, regarded the whole
movement as a revolt against Christianity and gradually
exterminated it. A religious profession who resents my 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               13

              THE ARTISTIC STERILITY OF THE CHURCH

characterization of the period -- which, by the way, is the same as
that of every recognized European authority on it -- told me to
read a recent French work, de Rougemont's Passion and Society, for
the corrected historical appreciation of the period. The book is
one of those freak originalities that the authorities ignore. It
takes troubadour literature in its final and feeblest stage, when
a few French and Italian poets were trying to save their art from
the Church by taking religious themes, and it falsely represents
these as typical troubadour literature. It describes as mystic in
the religious sense the greater poems of the whole literature, The
Romance of the Rose, whereas all experts recognize that "the rose"
is sex.

     If the apologist wearily grants that Europe in the Dark Age
was so low, economically and culturally, that we cannot expect even
religion to inspire a literature and insist that no power or agency
could have raised Europe afresh more quickly than the Church did,
the answer is that just during this period the Arabs and Persians,
starting to rebuild civilization long after the Church did, created
an amazingly abundant and brilliant literature -- poetic,
historical, scientific, and theological -- which Spanish Catholics
and Moslem fanatics later destroyed. And if the apologist says that
at all events after 1300 Christian Europe produced a great
literature he runs into the difficulty I explained in the last
chapter: How on earth does the Christian religion inspire a great
literature only in the period when, according to all historical
authorities, religious feeling and moral idealism were at their
lowest ebb?

     How many of the most distinguished writers between Dante and
Rabelais could even plausibly be claimed to show the inspiration of
the Catholic creed! Certainly not Chaucer, the greatest poet of
that period. The highest British authority on him, Prof. Lounsbury,
shows that he did not believe in immortality and, quoting the
poet's words, asks: "Can modern agnosticism point to a denial more
emphatic than that made in the 14th Century of the belief that
there exists for us any assurance of the life that is lived beyond,
the grave?" (Studies in Chaucer, II, 515). Not the two greatest
Italian writers, for Petrarch's best work was inspired by illicit
love and he scourged Papalism as no modern does, while Boceaccio's
great work is as far removed from religion as is that of Zola. Can
anyone find the spirit of the Church in Froissart's blood-soaked
Chronicle or in the defiant ethic of Villon's poetry'! In the anti-
ecclesiastical work of Valla, the purely scientific (a real anti-
clerical) work of Bacon, the comedies (often very loose) of Ariosto
or Benvenuto Cellini? The Catholic can have Tasso -- who reads him
anyway? -- and the Samma of Thomas Aquinas, but he will hardly
claim Erasmus or Rabelais as inspired by religion.

     It is time the writers who fancy that Gothic cathedrals and
religious paintings prove that there is a rich inspiration in the
Catholic creed tried to explain to us why it so dismally failed to
inspire great or artistic writers, especially poets. They never
attempted it. they speak of this period (1100-1500) as the Ages of
Faith they are mainly thinking of France and Italy. Isn't it
peculiar that of the artistic writers of the two countries, who
were numerous enough, three or four were "obscene" for every one 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               14

              THE ARTISTIC STERILITY OF THE CHURCH

who wrote stuff a modern nun would read? Quite a number of them
wrote vindications of what the Church called vice, even unnatural
vice, and comedies which would make a patrolman blush were written
and played in the Papal Court itself, while the great works of
religious art were being produced in other parts of the Vatican or
the city. Your Catholic friend who says to you, with an air of
common-sense; that in spite of all this talk Catholic art, and a
very great art, is there for any man to see, is thinking chiefly of
Rome, of St. Peters and the Vatican. Well, ask him to reflect on
this singular fact: Practically all this Roman art was created
under three Popes (Alexander VI, Julius II, and Leo X) of
notoriously vicious character and at a time when the Papal Court
and the clergy of Rome were steeped in what he calls immorality.
And, except for the fact that two out of the three Popes were
sodomists, which the Catholic apologist will swear black is white
to disprove, he need not read McCabe to learn this but will find it
in the most learned and authoritative Catholic history of the
period, that of Dr. Ludwig Pastor, which has been translated into
English.

     It is hardly surprising that the writers of the time did not
look for inspiration to the Catholic creed. The best of them, like
Picodella Mirandola, looked to a blend of Plantonism and primitive
(decidedly not Papal) Christianity. But most of them concentrated
on sex or, as they called it, love. They wrote the most brazen
erotic literature that had yet appeared, and some of the hottest of
them were patronized and rewarded by the Popes. Your professors of
European history do not tell you these things. They may mention
Macchiavelli, who was really more poisonous than the erotic
writers, but they prefer to enlarge on the pretty religious
sentimentality of an ignorant friar (the Little Flowers of Francis
of Assisi) and the work of Dante. They do not care even to point
out that Dante succeeds only when he is illustrating a concrete and
repulsive doctrine like hell, and that his poetic inspiration
evaporates when he tries to glorify the purely spiritual realm of
paradise. The Catholic creed inspires one in the same sense as the
Greek mythology did or the bastard Buddhist religion of Asia does.
Tell the artist that Buddha, Christ, Moses, or Mary was above the
common human level and he will set his imagination to create a
superman or a superwoman: Zeus or Jehovah, Athene or Mary.

     I said that if these Catholic apologists and artistic folk who
blat about medieval art were quite honest they would try to explain
why it was most "Inspired" when Italy, or Rome in particular, was
most immoral (not merely in respect of sex). They would, have a
still more awkward moment if they tried to explain why it
shrivelled up as soon as the morals of Rome and the Papal Court had
to be comparatively reformed because half of Europe was now
Protestant and cynically watching the Popes. It was the same with
literature as with the other arts. Italy, Spain, and Portugal
became more Catholic than ever. Except that the brazen parade of
sexual freedom had to be suppressed in Rome there was little or no
change of the moral level but skepticism, which had abounded during
the Renaissance, was extinguished and Protestantism truculently
excluded. And art above the level of mediocrity died. It is almost
a commonplace of the best recent histories of art that a human
factor -- a great new wealth with its accompanying sense of 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               15

              THE ARTISTIC STERILITY OF THE CHURCH

freedom, adventure, emancipation, and enjoyment -- had quickened
the blood of Europe during the later Middle Ages and evoked its art
as the spring-warmth quickens the circulation of the plants and
causes the flowers of summer. The soil of strictly Catholic
countries froze again, and there was no great literary art until a
new human factor, the vision of a better world, fired the blood
again in the second half of the 18th Century.

     But the absurdity of the Catholic argument, if you can call it
an argument, is shown by the record between the Reformation and the
Revolution, as it is shown wherever you test it by facts. A new
Dark Age settled on Italy, Spain, and Portugal, and Germany was
reduced almost to barbarism by the religious wars. In England, on
the other hand, art burst into full blossom as soon as the Catholic
creed was fully extinguished. No one who knows the history of
England would expect it earlier, but the point is that once England
got the conditions of an artistic age, which Italy had enjoyed much
earlier, it did not make the slightest difference that there was
now no Catholic faith to inspire it or Church to employ it.
Literary art, in particular, burst into bloom with the robust
Protestantism, richly leavened with skepticism, under the skeptical
Elizabeth. From Shakespeare, Marlowe, Spencer, and Bacoi, to
Swinburne, Carlyle, Ruskin, and Dickens, England -- anti-Papal
England -- created a great literature.

     France has been a mixed country ever since the rise of Calvin.
Until the later years of Louis XIV -- say to 1685 -- it had a very
large and influential Protestant element as well as much
skepticism, and after the death of Louis and his Jesuits, male and
female, skepticism spread very widely. But though the Church
controlled the majority it did not inspire the art. Literary
historians assign as the greater writers from the Reformation to
the Revolution Montaigne, Rabelais, Descartes, Pascal, La Fontaine,
Corieille, Racine, Boileau, Moliere, Montesquieu, Voltaire,
Rousseau, and Diderot. Eight out of the 13 were skeptics: two
(Descartes and Pascal) were regarded with more than suspicion by
Rome: two only, Racine and Corneille were good Catholics, but they
found their inspiration chiefly in Greek tragedy.

     Then came the new spring, the stirring of the blood of the
race which we broadly call the passion for freedom and democracy,
that is still raging. As the Church of Rome was, and is, bitterly
opposed to it we do not look for many Catholics amongst the greater
writers of the last century and a half. The question is not whether
you can name one or two Catholic writers of the first rank -- a
Chateau briand, a Newman (though his title is much disputed by
critics), a Mistral (a sort of Catholic) -- but why, when the Pope
claimed still to rule half the white world, there are only these
three amongst a hundred writers as distinguished as they in France,
Britain, America, Germany, Italy, Russia, and Scandinavia. And how
do even these compare in inspiration with Byron, Shelley,
Swinburne, Goethe, Schiller, Nietzsche, Ibsen, Dostoievsky,
Pushkin, Hugo, Carlyle, Shaw, D'Annunzio, Galdos, and a score of
others? Catholic literature as a whole is the flattest, stalest,
feeblest of all literature that takes itself seriously. They have
to ask us to accept Chesterton, Ronald Knox, Noyes, and Joyce
Kilmer as "great writers." And do not forget that the Church has 
far more money to pay for art today than it ever had before. It
would give a million dollars for a great artist.
                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               16

              THE ARTISTIC STERILITY OF THE CHURCH

     Ours will probably be described in historical manuals of the
future as an age of mediocrity. Statesmen, artists, and scientific
and literary men reach no peaks. Possibly the highest ability
enters the business world, where the reward is greatest, but we
have to remember that both in art and letters the man of
outstanding ability is sure of recognition and will certainly not
starve in an attic.

     If any reader is still inclined to wonder if I have not
yielded in part to prejudice in assigning the relative positions of
Catholic and non-Catholic writers let me recall that I have in an
earlier booklet followed a high and most impartial authority in
estimating the writers of the last forty years: the Nobel Prize
Committee. If anything the Committee, though it is supposed to be
guided by national committees of great weight and impartiality, is
prejudiced in favor of religious writers and, while it has had to
award the great prize 27 times out of the 37 to skeptics, it has
excluded skeptics whom the critics would put high above some who
were selected. Yet in this selection of the world's greatest
writers during the last 40 years we have only four who seem to be
in some literal way Catholics, though they were certainly not
inspired in their work by the Papal creed. The Pope claims the
allegiance of half the population of Europe and America but counts
-- in some cases dubiously -- only one-ninth of their greater
writers; and the award would have been more in accord with the
general view of literary critics if these four Catholic writers had
been replaced by my four selected from Wells, Conrad, Meredith,
Zola, b'Annunzio, Sudermann, Galoz, Ibanez, Santayana, Gorki, and
A. Tolstoy: all skeptics and not in favor in pious Sweden.

     The most deadly reply to the Catholic argument here, the
immediate reply to those who talk about the warmth, colorfulness,
and emotional richness of the Catholic atmosphere, is the relative
fewness of Catholic poets, especially of poets who show any sort of
indebtedness to Catholic belief for their inspiration. In the large
volume of distinguished poetical literature of Great Britain they
can claim only that of Dryden, who was a skeptic until his later
years and would in any case hardly be called inspired. In the
German-speaking area of Europe, which has always been one-third
Catholic, the record is not better. But it is enough to point out
that in what the Church claims as Catholic countries the majority
of the more distinguished poets during the last century and a half
have been anti-Papal and very few since Dante and Tasso can be
claimed to show Catholic inspiration in their work. Yet in literary
art we have one of the most effective tests of the Catholic claim.
A church may commission a man to paint a picture or carve a statue
but you cannot -- except where a Poet Laureate turns out verse to
order -- pay a poet to sit down and write a poem. You can neither
open the fount of inspiration with a golden key nor, in the case of
a true poet, close it by opposition it is arrant nonsense to say
that poets have "not yet recovered from the blight which the
Reformation brought upon art." A hostile world inflames the true
poet. Shelley was greatest in his Prometheus, Swinburn in his Songs
before Sunrise, Goethe in the first part of Faust.





                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               17

              THE ARTISTIC STERILITY OF THE CHURCH

     Most conspicuously is the failure of the Papal creed to
inspire poetic art shown in the cabe of hymns. The great majority 
of the hymns in a Catholic hymn-book are very poor stuff and many
of them are so vapid that one is forced to conclude that even
priest-selectors would never have included them if they had plenty
of good material to select from. In preparing a small popular work
on Rome (The Popes and Their Church) some years ago I looked
through an American Catholic hymn-book and selected a few gems. I
doubt if even the Salvation Army would (apart from the Mariolatry
of it) tolerate such doggerel as:

                The earth is but a vale of tears
                            O Maria!
                   When this exile is complete
                            O Maria!

     or:
                     O the blood of Christ!
                  it Soothes the Father's ire:
         Opes the gates of heaven, Quells eternal fire.
           Oft as it is sprinkled On our guilty beans,
           Satan in confession Terror-struck departs.

It is a conglomeration of rotten sentiments, wooden verse, and even
bad grammar. The mechanical grind of the verse-maker runs through
the book, and his insincerity is matched by the insincerity of the
singers. A very popular hymn for services for young women (children
of Mary, etc.) has the refrain:

     Holy Mary, let me come: Holy Mary, let me come
     Soon to be happy with thee in thy home.

Not a girl of the hundreds of thousands who sing that means what
she says, or, in fact, does not feel exactly the opposite
sentiment. Grown-up men and women lustily sing:

O Paradise, O Paradise,
'Tis weary waiting here;
I long to be where Jesus is,
To feel, to see him near.

     or:

Arm for deadly fight, earth and bell unite,
And swear in lasting bonds to bind me;
Raise the cross on high, Jesus is our cry,
With Jesus still the foe shall find me.

Large numbers of the hymns chant this glorious fight against the
world -- most of the men make for the nearest beer-house when the
service is over and the girls hurry to keep their dates -- the
flesh, and the devil. It helps to keep up the prestige and
importance of the clergy. They not only lead the troops but are the
only channels of the supernatural force (grace) without which the
fight is hopeless for the ordinary man.




                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               18

              THE ARTISTIC STERILITY OF THE CHURCH

     This theme runs through the whole collection. Catholics are,
you may have found, as cheerful and sinful as other folk, yet you 
would imagine from merely reading their hymns ("hell is raging for
my soul," etc.) that they were a portentously serious and
puritanical body of men and women. Next time your Catholic neighbor
presses you to read his literature, while refusing to read yours,
ask him to lend you his prayer-book and hymn-book. But I wager that
he won't.

                           Chapter IV

                   MASSES COMPOSED BY SKEPTICS

     The hymn is not so important in a Catholic as in a Protestant
church. It had no place in the ritual as it was finally evolved in
the Middle Ages; in accordance, of course, with the blue-prints
entrusted to Peter by Jesus in ancient Galilee, The faithful were
to assist AT, not assist IN or take part in the ceremonies, as I
will consider in the next chapter. We are told in Pliny's letter to
the Emperor Trajan that the early Christians met to "sing hymns to
Christ as God." -- probably chanting psalms in the Jewish tradition
-- but the "mass" was at that time not developed. When it was, the
faithful were in much the same position as skeptics in a theater,
watching a performance in strange costumes at the far end of the
building.

     Into all that, however, we cannot enter here but must confine
ourselves to the actual use of the art of music in Catholic
services today; and the chief question that interests us about it
is whether in the case of this art at least the Catholic creed has
not simply employed but inspired the artist.

     Music would lend itself to such inspiration more easily than
any other art. No painter or sculptor has ever given us a Jesus or
Mary that we could plausibly imagine in a Judaic environment, and
Michael Angelo's "Last Judgment" and Ruben's "Descent of the Cross"
are human scenes into which the spectator must read the Catholic
idea. Literary art is more complete to express idea's or dogmas,
but the expression can be immensely enhanced if it is associated
with noble music. If Catholicism inspires art, therefore, we should
look for a body of it in music corresponding in magnificence to the
great architecture, sculpture, and painting of the Middle Ages;
especially as, notoriously the chief attraction of the non-
Catholics whom it is hoped to convert to the wealthier churches is
"the fine music." Instead of having to listen, as one does in most
non-Catholic churches, to communal singing which, while it is more
enjoyed by the congregation itself, is rather artless than artistic
to the outsider, though it may be relieved at one point by a
professional soloist whom you may have heard in a cabaret the night
before, you can hear, well rendered if the church is not poor,
often with orchestral accompaniment, some of the finer compositions
of masters of music.

     Here you get the most decisive -- and the most deadly -- test
of the claim that the Roman religion inspires art. Not relying on
my memory of church-experience 50 years ago I take from a recent
authoritative publication the names of ten of the greatest 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               19

              THE ARTISTIC STERILITY OF THE CHURCH

composers of masses, litanies, and shorter pieces that are used in
Catholic churches today: Beethoven, Berlioz, Cherubini, Dvorak,
Gounod, Haydn, Mozart, Schubert, Verdi, and Weber. All these are
included in the Catholic Encyclopedia and it is claimed, especially
or by implication that they were Catholics.

     Yet no less than six of the ten were apostates -- Beethoven,
Berlioz, Cherubini, Haydn, Mozart, and Verdi -- in some cases
notoriously apostates, and some of the others were not clearly
orthodox. Gounod alone can be quoted as a man of real Catholic
piety -- in spots. You will read in biographies of him how at one
time he got so religious that he began to study for the Church: how
one day, when he asked Sarah Bernhardt if 'She ever prayed and she
said, "Me pray! Never, I'm an atheist," he fell upon his knees
before her and, to her disgust prayed for her for quarter of an
hour: and so on. Yes, and in the same biographies you will read
about his various little mistresses and his superficial changes of
mood. In all his work, says one authority, he "hovered between
mysticism and theatricality." Another authority says "between
mysticism and voluptuousness's," In his sacred work, says the
Catholic Encyclopedia sadly, he "did not penetrate the spirit of
the liturgy": which is a flat denial of Catholic inspiration. It
was such music, fine as it is, as Counod's Messe solennelle and Ave
Maria that moved the distinguished scientist Claude Bernard (also
claimed as a Catholic, of course, though a well-known apostate) to
say that Catholic services are just "opera for servant girls."

     The most flagrant cases of Catholic misrepresentation are
those of Beethoven, Cherubini, and Mozart. Beethoven's Mass in D is
coupled by authorities with his famous Ninth Symphony as "the most
gigantic of all musical designs." It is not, like Brahms's' Mass,
a Protestant composition but was intended, when he began to compose
it, to be performed at the installation of the Catholic Archbishop
of Olmutz and is today one of the richest treasures of the Catholic
repertory. But almost any biography will tell you that at that time
Beethoven had already abandoned his Catholic faith and adopted
Goethe's Pantheism, in comparison with which he thought the
Christian creed tawdry. His friend and chief biographer, A.
Schindler, and Nohl in his preface to Beethoven's Brevier (1870)
state this, and Sir G. Maeferren, who describes the Mass as
"perhaps the grandest piece of musical expression which art
possesses," says (Imperial Dictionary of Universal Biography) that
he was "a free thinker." He was persuaded, as some other
distinguished freethinkers were to accept the sacraments before
death, but all admit that he looked upon them as, at the best,
symbols. Nohl says that when the ceremony was over Beethoven
murmured, in the old Latin theatrical phrase, "Applaud, friends,
the comedy is over," but the better-informed Schindler says that in
these words Beethoven referred to the approaching close of his
life. It is at all events agreed that he had very seriously, on
philosophic grounds, discarded Catholicism 30 years before he wrote
the Mass and, unlike other artists, he never wavered in his
Rationalism.

     Cherubini, though his name is not as familiar to our
generation as those of Beethoven and Wagner, composed five masses,
two Requiems (or mass for the dead), and a very large number of 
pieces for Catholic use. A critic pronounces these "the most 

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               20

              THE ARTISTIC STERILITY OF THE CHURCH

important works of their age," and Gounod who agrees, quotes
Beethoven saying chiefly with an eye to his religious work, that
Cherubini was "the greatest master of his age." But it is
undisputed that he abandoned the Catholic religion before he
composed any of this sacred music. He lived in Paris in the
revolutionary days and devoted his great talent to the
revolutionary cause. It was after the Restoration, when he was
superintendent of the royal chapel, that he wrote masses, etc., but
he never returned to the faith. His British Catholic biographer
Bellasis admits that he did not receive the sacraments before death
and quotes the reluctant testimony of his Catholic daughter that he
was "not mystical but broad-minded in religion." Another biographer
observes that his sacred music was "not created by faith in and
love of what he composed."

     Mozart, who composed 15 masses and a very large amount of
other Catholic pieces, had so decidedly rejected the Catholic creed
in early manhood that when he was dying he refused his wife's
entreaty that he would see a priest, and his apostasy was so
notorious that when the wife herself asked a priest to come the man
refused, and the great musician wag buried without ceremony in the
common grave of the poor. So his chief biographers Wilder and
Ulibichev, and the facts are undisputed. The latter quotes Mozart
saying in reference to his early Catholic belief: "That is all over
and will never come back" (I. 243). He had become a Freemason
before he was thirty, at a time when the Church regarded
Freemasonry as a device of the devil, and to the end of his life he
remained at the most a Deist. As is well known, he composed one of
the most beautiful and most frequently used masses of the dead, and
the circumstances throw an ironic light on this question of art and
Catholicism. A rich musical amateur, Count Walsegg, secretly paid
Mozart, who was desperately poor, to compose the mass and let
Walsegg put his name on it. Shortly afterwards the great artist
died and was "buried like a dog."

     Let me further illustrate this point from the biography of
another great musician. I do not suppose that the German Requiem of
Brahms is used in Catholic services, as the music is set to texts
from the German translation of the bible, which Catholics are
forbidden to read, but it is just as "inspired" as Mozart's mass.
Yet Brahms was an Agnostic, as he repeatedly tells in his letters
(Letters of J. Brahms, Eng. trans. 1909). The instructive point is
that it is obviously the thought of death that inspired the music,
not the Catholic doctrine about death. In almost his last year of
life Brahms wrote and composed his "Four Serious Songs (Ver Emate
Gesange). The writer on him in the Encyclopedia Britannica calls
these his "supreme achievement in dignified utterance of noble
thought." It warns you to read some of these musical critics with
discretion. The words of the songs plainly reject the idea of
immortality, and Brahms admitted in a letter to Herzogenberg that
that was his intention.

     Haydn composed even more masses and other church music than
Gounod or Cherubini, and he is still a high favorite in the
Catholic repertory. In the Catholic Encyclopedia he is, of course,
a loyal, if very amorous, son of the Church, though Mendelssohn's
opinion that his sacred music was "scandalously gay" is quoted, and


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               21

              THE ARTISTIC STERILITY OF THE CHURCH

we get the usual caution that it is better as art than as an
expression of Catholic ideas. In point of fact he was, like Mozart,
a Freemason, and a Mason was to Rome in those days what a Bolshevik
is today.

     Verdi, has given the Church a mass for the dead, a Te Deum, an
Ave Maria, a Stabat Mater and other sacred compositions, and he is
feebly claimed in the Catholic Encyclopedia. It is a particularly
brazen claim as, while such claims are usually in the case of great
artists or scientists based upon the fact that the last sacraments
were daubed on them while they were unconscious or administered to
gratify Catholic relatives, Verdi stipulated in his will that he
was to be buried without "any part of the formulae" (F.T.
Garibaldi, Giuseppe Verde., 1903, p. 235). He was a man of more
solid character than is usual in the operatic world -- he gave
2,000,000 lire to build a home for aged and ailing musicians. --
and wrote his mass for the dead only to honor his dead friend
Manzoni. He was a moderate anti-Papal in the political struggle and
was often assailed by the clergy.

     A full inquiry, which naturally cannot be made for the purpose
of writing one chapter of a booklet, into the lives and sentiments
of all the leading composers of Catholic music would clearly be of
considerable interest. I happened to have made some inquiry at an
earlier date as far as these masters are concerned, and the results
are quite enough for my purpose. The Church employed them and did
not clearly inspire a single one of them. Like the painters of the
Renaissance, whose art was equally great in depicting courtesans
and saints, pious scenes and bacchanalian scenes, they were
"neither Christians nor pagans but artists" as Symonds says. If you
commission an artist, or if he himself proposes, to express the
super-human, his own belief in the matter is not concerned.

     Anyone who has heard one of these florid masses in a Catholic
church feels that it is mainly, as in the opera-house, a commercial
use of art. I was attached, as a priest and professor, to a middle-
class suburban chapel in London for some years. As I have
explained, the only obligation of the people was to bear a mass
every Sunday morning, and the great majority discharged this, in
spite of the general disposition to be longer abed on Sundays, by
assisting at a short early mass. There was no music, and the
"sublime" service was gabbled through by the priest in 25 minutes.
At 11 there was a sung or "high" mass, and this -- it might have
been called the Dress Parade -- all the more comfortable
parishioners attended. Several times a year an orchestra was
employed and one of the classical masses was sung. It doubtless
gave many a heightened idea of the solemnity of the feast, but from
the clerical angle it had only one aim: money. Very special
collections, sometimes taken by the monks themselves, were made,
and the extra hiring of singers and musicians was far more than
covered.

     The singers of these masses and other choral services are,
even on ordinary Sundays quite commonly non-Catholics. They are
just professional singers, and the question of combining a moderate
wage with efficient work is regarded as more important than the
question of their religion or irreligion. I never heard of one 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               22

              THE ARTISTIC STERILITY OF THE CHURCH

being "converted." Near the church to which I was attached was a
popular beer-house of a superior type, and the pietists of our
congregation sent in scandalized protests that after the Sunday
services they had to see the whole body of singers repair noisily
to the Saloon Bar. They never understood a word that they sang;
for, as I said, the English hymn has a very small place on a
Catholic Sunday evening service and none in the morning service.
The whole performance is, in fact, sheerly theatrical. Even the
priests at the altar -- there are usually three -- have a bench in
the sanctuary and at intervals in their very sacred manipulations
they retire to sit on this while the choir sings, with senseless
repetitions (to give the composer elbow-room) and long-drawn
phrases, certain parts of the mass. It is fine music; and it makes
a mockery of the sense of the ritual from a religious viewpoint.
Catholic's sometimes feel this.

     My father used to tell of an experience of this kind. He once
took a country cousin, a Catholic, to one of our swell morning
services. When the choir finished the piece they were singing (in
the ritual it was a simple recital of the creed) for the second or
third time and went back to the middle once more, the man, who was
moving restlessly in his sent, whispered to my father: "Damn it,
Bill, why don't they say Amen and 'a done with it."


                            Chapter V

           WHY A DEAD LANGUAGE IS USED IN THE LITURGY

     The reader must not lose sight of the guiding idea of this
booklet. It is an examination of the claim that the Catholic creed
inspires great art: that it was the main inspiration of the superb
art of the Middle Ages, and that the general mediocrity, or the
lower general level, of art since the 16th Century is due to the
destruction of the influence of the Church over half the world.
This is one of the smooth generalizations which an age that has
become, for not very creditable reasons, complaisant to the Church
accepts too easily from the apologist. As history it is on a level
with the mendacious claim that the Roman Church gave the world
schools broke the fetter's of the slave, and inspired mercy and
philanthropy.

     Specially rich periods of artistic, production have always
been limited in point of time. They may last 50 years or several
centuries but they end in mediocrity. Such periods are also
commonly periods of growing skepticism -- compare the great art-
period of China, Athens, Persia, and Arab Spain and Sicily -- and
the greater artists share this with the general educated class. But
the temples and priesthoods are the richest employers, and the
artist is concerned only that his art shall do justice to his
subject. He may in a sense find an idea (of a Mother of God, for
instance) inspiring though he does, not regard it as a truth or as
an idea corresponding to reality. I have given ample evidence of
this.

     As to the common Catholic sophism that the reduction of the
Pope's sphere of influence accounts for the cessation of medieval
art we saw that the answer is easy. Two arts, literature and music,

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               23

              THE ARTISTIC STERILITY OF THE CHURCH

have been far greater since the Reformation than they were in the
Middle Ages, and they ought to be particularly useful for
expressing religious ideas. But Catholics have had a miserably
small part in proportion to their numbers, in the finer creations
of those arts. The medieval Church employed but did not inspire
artists -- a rare Fra Angelica does not alter the general truth --
and it is plausible to think that the immense reduction of its
wealth after the Reform affected this. But their reduction does not
explain the death of art in Catholic, Spain or the predominance of
secular art in France. Anyhow, the Church is now richer and more
powerful than ever, and the non-Catholic world has been duped or
bribed into such an attitude that it would welcome Catholic
artistic production of a high order. You cannot even speak of the
chill of a hostile environment, even if you think that such a thing
does prevent a great artist from expressing himself. Yet the
Church, while it boasts that it has more members than ever and
certainly has far more wealth than ever, cannot inspire great art
in its own body. Four-fifths of its best modern art, its music, was
composed by the type of men it professes's to abhor above all
others -- apostates'. "The Church and its great art" is part of the
dupery it practices on the modern mind. But if I had been content
to say so boldly, or to refer the reader to other writings of mine,
I should have been unconvincing, so in this booklet I have had to
give considerable detail. I trust it has interested the reader.

     There remains the question why the Roman Church employs a dead
language, Latin, in its services. It is, of course, not unusual for
priests to continue to read the sacred books of a religion in the
language, which may otherwise be dead, in which they were written.
The Jews still have the Old Testament read in Hebrew: the Moslem
even in Turkey and elsewhere read the Koran in Arabic. But in the
Church of Rome practically the entire service on Sundays and the
morning service on all days is in Latin. The Greek Church and its
various national daughters have the services in ancient Greek, but
their motive is the same as that of the Roman hierarchy. It is not
as is sometimes suggested, in order to affirm and sustain the
international or Catholic character of the Church. lt has a double
object. Locally it helps to maintain the very emphatic line that is
drawn between the clergy and the laity and strengthen the position
of the former as a separate and very much higher caste; and,
especially, it is one of the most effective means of reminding
Catholics everywhere of their connection with and object dependence
upon the Vatican and the Papacy.

     A Catholic church has the upper (away from the door) end, or
usually about a fourth or fifth of the area, isolated by a
decorative low iron rail beyond which the laity must never go. Most
of this is empty space to add to the impressiveness of the altar at
the extreme end at which, raised by a number of steps above the
body of the church, the priests, in vestments of colored silk --
the color changing according to the saint, or mystery honored on
that day -- over long white linen robes, the priests perform their
ceremonies. Remember the Catholic belief that on that altar Jesus
Christ is physically and bodily present under the "accidents" of a
wafer or very thin cracker, and you will realize the feeling,
almost of awe, with which the devout Catholic follows the
evolutions in the distant sanctuary. The setting is exactly the 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               24

              THE ARTISTIC STERILITY OF THE CHURCH

same as in a theater, and, though the body of the church is not
darkened, at the evening service the light about the altar is
increased by an immense number of candles in shining brass
candelabra, flowers are used lavishly, and the sanctuary is
gradually filled with a slight haze from the fumes of incense. It
is a continuation of the old pagan tradition. So the priests of
Isis or Mithra once impressed their followers. Indeed it goes back
to the sacrifices in the Jewish temple, the pageants on the great
festivals of ancient Egypt, even the mysteries performed at the
summit of lofty pyramid temples in ancient Babylon and Assyria
while the crowd stood in silence in the court-yard. To some extent
the modern theater, which was not in its beginnings a revival of
the Greek theater, is developed from this clerical show. Simple
theatrical features were added to the ceremony in the sanctuary to
please the totally illiterate congregation and out of these
developed the early "miracle play." Large numbers of non-Catholics
attend Catholic services, generally standing near the door, just to
see the quaint free spectacle at the far end of the church.

     The use of Latin has an obvious advantage in spectacles of
this sort, but it has others which are not obvious. The morning
service, the mass, is so rigorously confined to Latin that in my
sacerdotal days we had to chant even the final prayer for the king
in Latin! On Catholic doctrine there is no disadvantage whatever in
this use of Latin. The mass is not a "Service" in the ordinary
sense. What happens in the mass is that the priest offers a real
sacrifice to God. Don't ask me to explain here how Jesus Christ
(God) is offered to a God who is not Jesus Christ, as in what sense
it is a real sacrifice. I did enough cold dissection of the amazing
doctrines of the Roman Church in the 16th book and do not care to
return to that tedious occupation. It is enough to say that the
Church theory is that the priest in every mass "repeats, the
sacrifice of Calvary" an all that the people have to do is to be
present on their knees with bowed heads and silent lips..

     When this "solemn sacrifice" is in modern times accompanied by
the operatic music of Gounod or Haydn, when the priests interrupt
the solemnity in various places and sit while tenors and bass and
perhaps violins and cellos, distort the language of the prayers
into musical arabesques, the result is really so fantastic and.
irreligious that Pius X, the blunt old peasant Pope of 40 years
ago, issued a ukase that this sort of thing must stop. He wanted to
bring the Church back to the use of plain chant, the simple musical
notation used before operatic music was invented, at least as it
was improved by Palestrina. For once a Pope found that he was not
really an autocrat. Even in the Church the power of the purse is
greater than the terrific powers granted in theory to the Pope. The
financial loss in every country would have been immense. There
would be no more "opera for servant girls"; no more "beautiful
services" for artistic converts and neurasthenic ladies.

     This concealment of the mutilation or massacre of the liturgy
in musical services by keeping the words in Latin is balanced by
the advantage in low (or unsung) masses. I explained in an earlier
chapter that, although this is a long series of prayers and
addresses to the Almighty of a solemnity in accordance with the
Catholic theory of the mass, the people are impatient and are apt 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               25

              THE ARTISTIC STERILITY OF THE CHURCH

to complain of any priest who does not "get through" in less than
half an hour, usually 25 minutes. The young priest has to practice
for weeks before he says his first mass. He has to learn to say the
prayers, some of which change with the calendar, at -- I have just
tested by experience -- about 200 words a minute. It is, perhaps,
fortunate for himself that the words are in Latin, for, although he
is supposed to understand the very elementary Church Latin, he is
less sensible of the meaning, except in the slower and more solemn
passages, than he would be if they were in English.

     The advantage in helping to link the entire Church with Rome,
the home of the Latin tongue, is just as obvious. I have
occasionally made light comments on the American apologists and
priests -- if not bishops and cardinals -- who are so blatant in
stressing the harmony of their faith with American ideals that they
swear they would cut the connection with Rome or (which is the same
thing) defy the Pope if he gave orders inconsistent with the
American spirit or Constitution. Would they, on that highly
fantastic hypothesis, abandon the use of Latin in the services? On
what ground could they retain it? And if they turned the liturgy
into plain American how would the archaic sentiments sound, and how
would the mutilation of the words by priests at the altar or by
non-Catholic singers in the choir impress the faithful?

     They could retain it only on one ground, and it is the chief
reason why the Church retains it today in every country. It is part
of the paraphernalia that makes a separate and very superior caste
of the priests. Like the black cassock or black suit, the reversed
collar, the shaven poll which he is supposed to have, the
incongruous title of "Father" for a man who professes to think
paternity a weakness of the flesh, the ancient Roman (or possibly
Persian and Egyptian) garb he wears at the altar, the dividing
sanctuary line, the "blessing" which a good Catholic (on his or her
knee's) is supposed to ask when he enters a house, and so on, it
marks him off as a member of a sacred caste. In a Catholic country
his indulgence in drink does not matter -- little notice is taken
of this even in Eire -- and his amorous adventures are judged very
humanly. As he repeatedly reminds them in sermons, his character as
a man has nothing to do with the mystic and august character which
"Holy Orders" have conferred on him. He can absolve sins or in
certain cases refuse to absolve them and leave a man under sentence
of hell. He can work the stupendous miracle of transubstantiation.
When countries are still solidly Catholic, and equally illiterate
and densely ignorant, he encourages the belief that his magical
powers go far beyond invisible results like absolving sins or
turning a bit of paste into the living body of Jesus. His curse may
be a very real thing. His prayers -- at from a quarter to one or
two dollars a time -- are more effective than the services of a
doctor or a veterinary surgeon and must be secured for a vast range
of purpose's, from blessing a new house or a new churn or fishing
boat to success in an impending examination, the detection of a
thief, curing a woman of sterility, or painlessly removing a gall-
stone.

     We need not, however, go back once more into "the really
Catholic world"; though you will not forget that these are
conditions in which two-thirds of the Pope's subjects live. Our 
broad conclusion must be that instead of the Church of Rome 

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               26

              THE ARTISTIC STERILITY OF THE CHURCH

rendering a notable service to the race and to civilization in
inspiring art it has in every age used such art as was available
for the usual purposes of the Black International: the protection
or augmentation of their power and wealth. It has not rendered, a
service to the exploited mass of the people by bringing color and
warmth into their drab lives by its services but has used art, if
you can give that title to the decorations and services of the
average Catholic church, to distract their attention from the
absurdity of its doctrines and the extortions of the priests. In
nine-tenths of its sphere of influence it uses debased forms of art
to help to prevent people from reflecting, during their one hour a
week in church, that what they are taught to call their faith is an
idle and, in proportions to their resources, costly compliance with
the traditional customs in which they were reared; and in the
Churches of the more comfortable one-tenth it uses art, like any
other employer and from almost any source, to help in sustaining
that uncritical attitude which enables the apologist to foist
amazing untruths and sophistry even upon the educated layman.
Religion may or may not be "the opium of the people." Catholic art
certainly is.

     It is a familiar Protestant charge that religion in the Roman
Church is mechanical, materialistic, a matter of physical acts and
sensuous titillations. It is an entirely just charge as far as the
great majority of the faithful are concerned. The Black
International has in its own interest enacted that it is compulsory
under the direct penalties that a man shall be in the church,
looking on at a ceremony, which he only half understands, for half
an hour once a week. The rest is voluntary and has to be made
attractive. I have in Eastern Europe seen men standing outside the
wide-open doors of a cathedral, some of them smoking cigarette's,
listening to the distant mass. They are within the Catholic law.
Religion is to them not a set of beliefs but a small number of
compulsory movements. For the majority of the others it is a series
of ceremonies which they usually -- there are, of course, special
festivals at rare intervals which rouse real fervor -- follow in a
frame of mind which it would be difficult to analyze and the clergy
have no desire to analyze. People are "doing their duty." And if
anybody thinks this a superficial statement of the situation let
him wait until in the next book we squarely face the claim that the
Church at least renders a great social service or "does good."

                          ****     ****

    Reproducible Electronic Publishing can defeat censorship.

   The Bank of Wisdom is a collection of the most thoughtful,
scholarly and factual books. These computer books are reprints of
suppressed books and will cover American and world history; the
Biographies and writings of famous persons, and especially of our
nations Founding Fathers. They will include philosophy and
religion. all these subjects, and more, will be made available to
the public in electronic form, easily copied and distributed, so
that America can again become what its Founders intended --

                 The Free Market-Place of Ideas.

                          ****     ****

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               27
                               
                               
                               
                               
                               
                                                       28 page printout

    Reproducible Electronic Publishing can defeat censorship.

          This file, its printout, or copies of either
          are to be copied and given away, but NOT sold.

          Bank of Wisdom, Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                          ****     ****

Edited by E. Haldeman-Julius

THE BLACK INTERNATIONAL                 No. 19

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

        THE CATHOLIC CHURCH DOES FAR MORE HARM THAN GOOD

                        by Joseph McCabe

                  HALDEMAN-JULIUS PUBLICATIONS
                     GIRARD  -- : --  KANSAS

                          ****     ****

   CHAPTER

     I    Progress in Catholic and Non-Catholic Countries ..... 1

    II    The Black International always in the Rear .......... 8

   III    The Wicked World Educates the Church ............... 14

    IV    The Contrast of Russia and Priest-Ruled Countries .. 19

     V    The Monstrous Attempt to Restore the Middle Ages ... 25


                          ****     ****

                            Chapter I

         PROGRESS IN CATHOLIC AND NON-CATHOLIC COUNTRIES

     Throughout these ten booklets, in which I have shown that the
Church of Rome is the natural ally of the German, Japanese, and
Italians, I have asked the reader to see it as primarily a vast
economic corporation, the Black International, fighting for
survival, in an age in which educated people despise its doctrines
and all informed people loathe its methods. Whether any, or how
many, of this monstrous regiment of cardinals and bishops, priests
and monks, sincerely believe the medieval sophistication of ancient
Greek and oriental superstitions which they profess is here
entirely irrelevant. We are studying the Church as an institution
because we are trying to understand its action throughout the
world.

     It admits that it seeks wealth and power but insists that this
is only in order that it may more effectively promote what it calls
the spiritual and eternal interests of men. With that pretext also 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               1

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

we are not concerned. The apologist will hardly expect us to admit
that it entered into an alliance with (in this order) Italy, Japan,
and Germany because it believed they would help it to look after
the soul's of men. Such a plea would raise a broad grin from
Cologne to Tokyo. Those nations sought wealth and power; so did the
Bleak International. They meant to secure and protect this wealth
and power by a regime of bloody tyranny; and the Black
International, which has for 800 years relied upon that method,
needed it more urgently than ever. The bandits wanted the
international influence of the Vatican to help to dupe the world
about their designs; and they promised it a very large share of the
spoils of victory by annihilating its critic's and recovering its
lost provinces for it.

     After what we have seen that is as obvious as the Empire State
Building. Men of the Munich mentality as regards the Church of Rome
petulantly exclaim that it is a monstrous charge. Yes: and the war
and the Pope's share in it, the debasement of France by priest-
ridden traitors, and the horrors of the Spanish and Portuguese hell
are a monstrous reality. If these narrow-minded folk who think
themselves so superior to prejudice were to look facts in the face
they Would see that we accuse the Church of doing only what it has
done over and over again since the Albiginsian Massacre and the
founding of the Inquisition 700 years ago. They would find that the
Roman Black International is not the only spiritual army that has
prostituted itself for gold in our time.

     In 1937 there was a Parliament of Religions at Calcutta. The
report of the proceedings in two fat volumes makes a materialist
like myself blush. Representatives of all the world's religions and
sects joined enthusiastically in the good work, and the speeches
glitter like Woolworth jewelry with nice phrases about the
spiritual and the Ideal, the sins of men and the wickedness of the
world, the lofty morality by which these folk are going to save the
race. As you will remember, the Japs had by this time completely
enslaved and debauched Manchuria and the north of China and they
were openly gathering for their next orgy of brutality. And not a
single one of these Asiatic word-spinners of the hundred beautiful
religions said one single word about it. One foreigner, a British
professor, ventured to say ten very mild words about it.

     If you want to know why, though of course nobody did at the
time, it was not simply because people who live on these shining
heights find it difficult to see the common earth. It was mainly
because the Black International or Japanese Buddhism was doing in
Asia just what the Roman priests were doing in Europe and America.
We must not offend our Buddhist fellow-citizens.

     Some of my readers will remember that in 1937, while these
spiritual folk were having their jamboree in Calcutta and the
world-press was following their beneficent work with admiration. I
published, through Haldeman-Julius, a booklet with the title
Imperialistic Japan and its Aims. I described how by that time the.
criminal plot of the Japs was so far from being secret that scores
of patriotic societies, some with millions of member's, publicly
boasted of it and gloated over realistic pictures and panoramas
exhibited in the stores of the cities, of the destruction of the 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               2

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

American fleet. I gave the evidence that the Buddhist priests and
monks, 150,000 strong, had been bought by the government and the
capitalists and were conducting an intensive campaign all over
South Asia to create a Fifth Column for the "Japanese Liberator's."
They had been bought in cash, just as the Vatican had been bought
by Mussolini, and, like the Vatican, they looked for even greater
profit when the job was done.

     They earned their pay. Not only did they work up the Japanese
people to a fanatical enthusiasm for the plan of making themselves
rich by exploiting a third of the world but they created nests of
traitors from French Indo-China to the Persian Gulf. There were
10.000 Buddhist quislings in Rangoon alone and there were others in
key-positions all over Burma. Ceylon teems with them. For ten years
the work has proceeded under a very thin disguise of Buddhist
concern for the spiritual interests of men. Yet in a Parliament of
Religions held at Chicago in 1939 America had been emphatically
warned that these Buddhist priests had already grown fat on
imperialist gold.

     While disreputable atheists and materialists like Haldeman-
Julius and McCabe, who told the world the truth, were very properly
ignored by all respectable folk these spiritual gasbags, who
blinded it to the realities of life, where loaded with laurels and
dollars. It is nice, and so profitable, to be profound and
spiritual!

     However. Immense as is the work which I bring to a close with
this booklet I have no space to enlarge, upon even so important a
side-issue as the corruption of Buddhism (which was quite willing
in every age to entertain a business proposition) by the fine
imperialist's of Japan. It is enough that "our two great religions"
have made a mockery of every compliment, that every long-haired
idealist in America had lavished upon them. They have prostituted
themselves to the Butchers Union, while atheistic Russia, upon
which most of these idealists have poured abuse for the last twenty
years, has won a splendid tribute from a disillusioned world. But
I have still an important point to make in regard to the Church of
Rome to complete the explanation of its behavior.

     In his recent work, 'You Can't Be Too Careful,' H. G. Wells
says: "The most evil thing in the world today is the Roman Catholic
Church." It is also one of the most respected things in the world
today, especially in America. But there is no mystery about the
respect, the power, even the adulation which it enjoys. It commands
about 10,000,000 votes, nicely bunched together for the most part
in certain states and at the disposal of the priests. It has
$4,000,000,000 invested, an income of about $1,000,000,000 and an
army of about quarter of a million paid agents of one kind or
other. It has a very large press and radio-service. It has about
5,000,000 auxiliary troops, open fanatics and secret intriguers,
sworn to promote "the welfare of the Church." It has immense
opportunities of rewarding loyalty, from a Papal Knighthood to a
job as janitor. It has a control of editors, politicians, writers,
libraries, cinemas, radio programs, owners of halls and theaters,
professors, booksellers, even the police, the public school's,



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               3

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

parole-boards, the mails, etc. It has . . . But maybe that will do.
What we had better ask is what excuse is made for themselves by the
politicians, professors, and others who chant the praises of "the
venerable Church."

     You know it. They reply that the Church does good -- oh, an
enormous amount of good: so much, in fact, that it is one of the
foundations of the state. In a recent book (Mission to Moscow),
which the pious Mr. Gollancz spreads in England, Ambassador Davies,
discussing the vices and virtues of Russia, says that with all its
faults it must not be classed with Germany and Italy, as a
totalitarian state. Phew! Are there still folk who talk like that?
However, what Mr. Davies mean's is that the Russian state is, and
the Nazi state is not, "based upon the altruistic principles of the
Christian religion." If that is true of Russia -- if you will
pardon the supposition -- how far more true it must be of the
American civilization with its 100,000 parsons and its more
brilliant exhibition of those principles. And of the Churches which
render this inestimable service the Church of Rome is immeasurably
the greatest: the Church that regards all the others with
contemptuous tolerance and pronounces them rebellious and
ineffective offshoots of the age-old Church on which the sun never
sets.

     In western stories, of which I am fond, I often read in
descriptions of cow-town of the "false front" of the bank. the
saloon, and the store. The phrase fits the Roman Church In America,
for it is, to Americans, the false front of the international Papal
Church. That is why so many Americans hesitate in face of the most
conclusive evidence to admit the charge we bring against the Black
International. Why, they say, this is the Church that first raised
the banner of religious freedom on American soil: the Church that
gave even Europe the idea of democracies: the Church that
periodically provides the whole world, in Papal encyclicals, with
a guidance on problems of the hour which the press reproduces in
letters of gold: the Church that gathers 350,000,000 happy and
virtuous folk, without distinction of class, color, or odor, under
its White mantle: the Church that promotes culture and exerts an
inflexible moral rule over the nations.

     That is the false front. In these 20 booklets I have taken you
behind it and shown you the real Church of Rome. Its apologists lie
outrageously about it. They lie about its political and ethical
principles, its history and its law, its numbers and its quality,
its plots and its open action. They dare not allow the press today
to let the world know the truth about the social condition and the
action of the Church in a score of countries from Bolivia to Japan.
I have proved all this.

     In my long literary career I have written books in strange
conditions -- in the smoking rooms and Marconi cabins of liners, in
crowded apartments-houses or on the sunny beach, in the bed-rooms
of hotels of all grades -- but I never before wrote, as I have
written these 300,000 words, on a battlefield. The National
Library, in which I delve for material, is charred and battered and
almost deserted and the books for which I call come to me sometimes
disfigured by fire or water or fail, and evermore fail, to come...


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               4

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

But you can guess all that. I say that in spite of all this these
twenty booklets are from beginning to end just statements of fact,
on incontestable evidence, and they prove that the Catholic Church
is, if not "the most evil thing in the world," certainly the most
treacherous and mendacious.

     It may seem that I have reserved to the last the question
which will seem to many the most important: the question what the
Church is worth to the world on a balance of services and
disservices. But I have been replying to that question all through.
Many folk say that they do not care what the Church did in the 4th
Century, or the 13th or the 16th; and there is so much blood and
dirt on the pages of medieval history that Catholics often
encourage that feeling, or they would at least like you to believe
that the services they claim -- usually by a gross perversion of
history -- to have rendered were due to a noble spirit which is
ever fresh in the Church, while those immense splotches of blood,
those vast areas of servile squalor, and those equally vast areas
of priestly and monastic corruption were just temporary and local
foulings of the garments of the Church in the mud of a wicked
world. If you fancy that that childish stuff is really not written
today dip into any Catholic book that deals with these matters.

     We might leave the past of the Church in its smelly historical
tomb if Catholic apologists would let us, but they will not. They
lie heroically about its history, and it is vital to an
understanding of the Black International that we should know that
its writer's lie habitually. In this connection their lies take the
shape of claiming that the Church rendered massive services to
civilization, and it is largely on the ground of these fictitious
services that they demand consideration today.

     Moreover, the Church boasts, and on the whole justly, that it
never changes. It is a strange boast in a world that decidedly
grows in wisdom and sheds innumerable errors as it advances, but it
does at all events justify us in judging what the Church does today
by what it did in the Middle Ages, when it was perfectly free to
carry out its principles. When modern Popes are stung into
indiscretion they use just the same language as medieval Popes did,
as we found Plus XI doing in his open letter to Cardinal Gasparri
in 1929. The Canon Law, which is kept in a dead language so that
priests alone can read it, makes the same monstrous claim of a
power over life and death as the medieval Popes made. The
bestiality which the Pope encourages in Spain and Portugal today is
the same as Popes encouraged a century ago in the whole of Southern
Europe and in all Europe during the Middle Ages.

     No, it is folly to ask us to let dead Popes bury their dead.
This work, however, is concerned with the Church today, and there
is so much to be said about it that I have to avoid history or
confine my short excursions into it within the strict needs of my
present task. So to the question whether the Church has done good
in the past and the race is indebted to it I just say bluntly that
practically every claim it makes is fictitious, as I have
exhaustively shown in earlier works, and on balance we must say
that it has retarded the advance of European civilization by many
centuries.


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               5

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

     I must say a little more than this in regard to what I call
the modern period. I believe that when scholarship and literature
are again free, when the disgraceful power over them of the Black
International is broken, historians will date the beginning of the
modern age from the outbreak of the French Revolution, The broad
ideal of a just life was then clearly formulated. The revolutionary
armies carried it, with their symbolic tricolor, as far as the
southernmost tips of Italy, Spain, and Portugal and Napoleon's,
armies bore the ensign of at least a liberal civilization to the
bounds of Europe. Naples and Madrid were for a time more advanced
than London. Latin America throbbed with a new passion.

     From that age to ours the outstanding event of history has
been the long-drawn battle for those ideals, and Rome has
throughout been on the side of our enemies. Ever since the bloody
shambles it countenanced, if it did not inspire, in Naples in 1794
the Black International has allied itself with every power, however
corrupt and brutal it was, that took the field against those who
were fighting for the elementary rights of man, for freedom and
democracy. What has happened in the last ten years is simply that
the Vatican, which had been compelled for half a century to profess
in democratic countries that it was reconciled with the new age --
in America alone the Black International has the effrontery to
claim that the Church is the actual source of modern ideals --
became convinced that it had found more powerful allies than ever
in the fight against liberalism, and the war which began in 1798
and in one country or other (especially Spain) has been almost
continuously maintained, has entered upon a new and terrible phase.

     That is the key-idea that you must keep clearly in mind if you
want to understand the relation of the Roman Church to the world-
war. It is an idea of crucial importance in estimating the world-
situation but no journalistic oracle in the United States dare say
it, while what we may call the literary and ethical oracles who,
discuss the more profound aspects of the situation will put forward
any fantastic theory, from the growth of materialism to the
diversion of the Gulf Stream, rather than risk offending Catholics
and injuring their own prestige and circulation, by telling the
plain truth. That this is the plain truth I have shown, as regard's
the last ten years, in these 20 books and for the earlier phase in
larger works, The True Story of the Roman Catholic Church and The
A peal to Reason Library.

     A third work would be of very considerable use to the modern
reader, especially in America, where, apart from the one or two
brushes with Britain, the historical development has encouraged a
real cultural isolation from Europe as fir as our present theme is
concerned. An American writer who visited me some years ago
confirmed me in my suspicion that there is no good and adequate
work available on the mighty struggle in Europe in the 19th Century
against the clerical-royalist-capitalist attempts to kill what
survived of the best ideals of the French Revolution. For that
matter there is today no work published in England, for it would
have to tell the ghastly truth about the Church, and in both
countries the Black International uses its new power, not merely to
exclude the truth from literature and education but to see that
false versions of the story of man from 1789 onward are imposed 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               6

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

everywhere. In the absence of such a work I can but reiterate that
from 1794 (in France and Italy) until its present alliance with
Fascism (in Spain and Poland, for instance) the Church has allied
itself with brutal oppressors and enemies of freedom, as I have
abundantly proved in earlier works, and sum up the evidence given
in this series of booklets in regard to the last ten years.

     It is useful to take a broad view before we look at the
situation more closely. The alleged service of the Roman Church in
promoting civilization can be very soundly tested from this broad
viewpoint. Just glance at the leading countries of the world and
note in each case what we -- the great majority of men and women in
the best-educated countries -- would assign as the grade of its
civilization and what proportion of the people the Roman Church
claims to control; and to allow for the present appalling confusion
or violent distortion of conditions we will survey the world as it
was in 1939 and regard only countries where the Roman Church is
substantially represented.

     Granting that total wealth or size is not of itself a
criterion of civilization there would be general agreement to name
these ten countries as having attained the highest rank: the United
States, Great Britain, Russia, France, Switzerland, Holland,
Denmark, Sweden, Norway, and Argentina. In none of these countries
does the Roman Church command the allegiance, of more than one-
sixth of the population except Holland. where its members and
political representatives are one-third of the whole -- still not
enough to have Influence on the general character -- and Argentina,
where, however, the constructive class is (or was until 1935)
mainly skeptical (and probably still is). Argentina is, in any
case, the one, power whose place in this list would be disputed.

     There would be general agreement to put these countries at the
lower end of the scale; Poland, Spain, Portugal, Italy, Eire,
Brazil, and most of the smaller South American Republics. In these
the Church claims the great majority of the people and certainly as
regards the constructive forces they are Catholic countries. They
are all Fascist, as none of the above ten are, but, for the moment
I am looking at what by general agreement would be called their
grade of civilization. The place of Hungary might be disputed, but
it is only little more than half Catholic and its dictator is not
a Catholic. Czecho-Slovakia as a whole was in the highest class,
but events have shown that the progressive qualities were in non-
Catholic Bohemia, and that Catholic Slovakia is at the level of
Poland. I have omitted Mexico, which on the ground of recent
accomplishment (reduction of crime and illiteracy, social
legislation, etc.) I should be disposed to put in the first class,
because its place would be warmly disputed. But one thing is not
open to dispute: whatever progress has been made in the last 20
years was due to an anti-Catholic body of statesmen and supporters.
Germany must be left out of account unless we go back to pre-Nazi
days, but even then Catholic's were a one-fourth minority and they
are In large part responsible for the triumph of Nazism and ruin of
the country. In Belgium the forces are about equal, and the grade
of civilization corresponds.

 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               7

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

     You will see the full significance of this if you recall that,
as I said, all these countries entered upon the great race, as we
may call it, of the last 150 year's with much the same equipment of
ideals. The Revolutionary and the Napoleonic armies, beating a path
for French literature, made those ideals familiar from Portugal to
Sweden, and Latin America was awakened from one end to the other by
the echoes of the struggle. Even Ireland had quite a notable body
of Deists and humanitarians (Robert Emmet, Wolfe Tone, and many
others) amongst its educated men in the last years of the 18th
Century. It has none today or not one who dare open his lips, and
the country remains, with all its political and religious pride,
poor, squalid, ignorant, and of inferior general character. in
other words, every country in which the influence of the Papacy was
paramount failed to advance in the path that was indicated by those
new ideals of civilization which we all regard as sound. But the
countries in which Rome had no such influence or where, as in
France, it lost its power, joined the predominantly Protestant
countries in advancing to the higher rank. That is the first reply,
and it is perfectly sound from the sociologleal angle, to the claim
that the Roman Church promotes civilization.


                           Chapter 11

           THE BLACK INTERNATIONAL ALWAYS IN THE REAR

     In this general survey I have repeatedly referred to the
ideals of freedom and democracy. For most of us these are partial
expressions of the modern spirit, the demand for justice, which, in
alliance with the advance of science, has lifted the ten countries
I named to the highest rank. The attempt of Catholic writers in
various countries to represent them as mere political claims, or
even as a liberalism, that the world has tried and found wanting,
are mere excuses to cover the Vatican's alliance with Fascism or
the Fascist Encyclical of the Pope Quadragesimo Anno. It must be
understood, however, that I have not assigned these 20 nations
their place in the scale of civilization on that test. If one
proposed to do this it would be simple and accurate to say that all
Catholic countries are now Fascist and all democratic countries are
non-Catholic. But it is more convincing if we apply a broader test
of civilization.

     The Catholic apologist would define the service of his Church
by saying (first and chiefly) that it defends the family, that it
trains all people whom it can influence in general moral character,
that it preaches and insists upon justice, individual and social,
and that it is zealous for education and philanthropy. And since,
he would say, the family is, according to very many if not most
sociologists, the foundation of the state, the particular zeal and
rigorous measures of his Church, which distinguish it in an age of
growing laxity, must especially recommend it to the statesman and
the social student.

     Piffle, as usual. The Roman Church has three distinctive
features in its teaching about the family. First, it insist that
its priests, monks, and nuns shall not marry and shall not have any
recognizable families; and since the implication of this is that 
sexual commerce has some sort of taint even where it is licensed

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               8

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

one does not see how we can speak here of the Church guarding this
particular foundation of the state. Secondly, it alone amongst the
Churches -- in fact, it shares this distinction only with a few
groups of the lowest savages on earth -- forbids divorce; and since
this harsh restriction of human rights has either, as in Catholic
countries, to be alleviated by the general use of mistresses or
brothels, or it amounts to a positive deterrent from marriage, we
again fail to perceive any service, and no statesman of any of the
leading civilizations has any respect for the Church's teaching on
this point. The law of divorce which now exists in every
civilization except those of lower grade that are subject to the
Pope is based upon the collective recognition of social experience
and upon a mature adjustment of the rights of the individual and
the needs of the state. The Catholic opposition to it professes to
be based upon some words of an ancient Jewish prophet of which we
have two contradictory versions in the records and which other
Christian Churches, of equal scholarship and greater sincerity,
find compatible with divorce. It is in any case really based, as I
showed, on the fierce determination of the Popes of the early
Middle Age's to get complete control of life. On such frivolous and
anti-social grounds does this particularly strident claim of the
Church to render human service rest; and our contempt deepens when
we find the Church playing fast and loose with its "indissoluble
marriage" when its own interest or profit is involved, as I showed
in my analysis of the clauses of the Canon Law and the practice of
the Papal Courts.

     Thirdly, the Black International boasts that it renders a
unique service to the state because it is the only Church or
institution that condemns, and very fiercely condemns birth
control. The Black International is as usual, out of date. For the
last ten years it has shared that distinction with the criminal
leaders of the Italian, Japanese, and German people. They wanted
soldiers and the excuse of over-population to cover their
imperialist greed. The Black International wanted more contributors
to its treasury and, as priests have admitted, to beat rival
Churches by outbreeding them. The clerical opposition to birth
control is, in fact, such an obvious piece of priestcraft and has
so little foundation even in their own weird and wonderful theology
that they confess (as I quoted), the Catholic laity in America are
to an alarming extent ignoring their sulphuric orders and
restricting their families: which makes their "social" argument
look rather anaemic.

     The apologists have recently been encouraged by the appearance
of a new school of opponents of birth control whose leaders and
statements are not religious. These professors and their learned
lady friends recognize that the old opposition was based upon a
demand for as many soldiers as possible and that the industrial and
professional markets are, in normal times and in capitalist
countries, already overcrowded. They say that the really sound
scientific plea is that the birth rate is so far falling out of
balance with the death rate that there will soon be a debilitating
preponderance of old folk over young. They do not take into account
the fact that science and common sense are steadily raising what we
may call the vitality-period of men and women. I could write
caustic pages on my own recent experience in being rejected (as one


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               9

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

in senile decay) from all departments of the British national
effort by men whose laziness, short hours, and easygoing methods
are notorious, But I have space only for one point. France has
practiced birth control for more than half a century almost as much
as America or Britain does today. But it was not old men who let
France down. It was a few Catholic old men, who were pushed into
office by these priests who are so concerned about the vitality of
civilization, Catholic adventurers like Laval and Bonnet, and
younger statesmen who were seduced by Catholic mistresses.

     In short, all this rhetoric about Catholic marriage and the
social welfare is hypocritical claptrap, and every statesman and
social student knows it. Every state finds in time its equilibrium
on grounds of experience in sex-matters. Sex-laws and restrictions
that are based upon ancient philosophic's or religions, ultimately
upon more ancient taboos and superstitions, merely distract
attention and hamper the social activity. Apologists for them have
to repeat outdated and thoroughly exposed statements about the ruin
of older civilizations by vice. Five year's ago most folk would
have said that the two most vigorous nations were the German and
the American, and both enjoyed an advanced degree of sexual
freedom. Today we should say that Russia and America are the most
vigorous nations. But according to the priests the American people
are only restrained from a monstrous parade of sex, in their books,
pictures, and theaters, by the severe paternal cheek of the clergy,
while Russia has always had a liberal divorce law and for quarter
of a century has denied that marriage is a sacrament and birth
control a sin.

     For reasons -- reasons of self-interest -- which I discussed
in an earlier book Catholic apologists have always put this sex and
marriage-business in the forefront of their statement of claims. It
more or less excises the absurd official virginity of their
priests, monks and nuns: It evokes a golden echo in the hearts of
rich widows and spinsters: and it really does mark a distinction
between the Church and "the world." In theory, that is to say. And
not only is the theory itself an antiquated ethic rehabilitated for
priestly purposes, so that those who profess to lead civilization
are far in the rear of modern thought, but in practice Catholics
are no more "moral" than other folk. I leave it to my readers'
knowledge of American life what the situation is in America, saying
only that I have a very extensive familiarity with the best
American fiction of a realist character and that I have made
extensive inquiries during the two years (at intervals) I have
spent in America. But for "Catholic countries" you may take as
typical the pleasant exaggeration which Byron wrote when he saw a
statue of the Virgin Mary in a Portuguese city: "Well do I ween the
only virgin there." He had probably made inquiries.

     Apologists obstinately insist that Irish girls are remarkably
chaste," though I have for 30 years given proof and bitter
complaints of English Catholics (including leading priests) that
the Irish girls are sent to Britain to drop their burdens and keep
down the record of illegitimate births in Eire. A New York attorney
writes me, or wrote me 30 years ago when I took up the question,
that the same complaint was made in the New England States. Sanger
says in his History of Prostitution (1919 edition) that on personal


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               10

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

interrogation of 2,000 New York prostitutes he found that 977 (706
of whom had been born in Ireland) had had Catholic parents, and had
been brought up as Catholics. The Catholic Times (May 31, 1924)
quoted Canon Hughes, one of the highest Catholic authorities,
saying that 60 percent of the prostitutes of Liverpool -- one of
the most Catholic and most vicious cities in England -- were Irish
and only 30 percent English. Ten years later another Catholic
expert, Mrs. Ellison, stated in a book that the situation is the
same in the cities of London, Glasgow, and Newcastle (big centers
of Irish immigration). A leaflet on the subject issued by the
Protestant Truth Society (British) gives a mass of Catholic
testimony and replies to the charge that illegitimacy is 3.4
percent in Protestant Ulster and (for the above reasons) only 0.7
in Catholic Connaught that it was at the time 9.30 in Belgium,
14.89 in Austria, 15.67 in Bavaria, and 50.00 in Guatemala. Since
emigration was checked the Irish have not boasted so much. I quoted
an editorial in the Irish Times (June 12, 1937) describing a
disgraceful official record of sex-crimes in County Clare which is
in Connaught!

     This chastity-talk is not only outdated from the ethical and
sociological angle but it supported by a remarkable variety of
untruths. And if it is suggested that the real service of the
Church lies in promoting morals or character in the broader sense
the reply to just as devastating. This plea is just a relic of the
old and purely rhetorical assertion that a religious basis is
required for sound conduct. The sufficient reply is that, I have
repeatedly shown, the general level of character in the leading
civilizations has risen in the same proportion as Church influence
has decayed. For the moment we are not concerned about cause and
effect. The fact is enough. As my friend Mr. E.S.P. Haynes, a
distinguished London attorney, has written -- and he is approvingly
quoted by Julian Huxley in his Religion Without Revelation (P. 52):
"If morality did really depend on other worldly sanctions, the
religious changes of the last fifty years would by now have
dissolved society at large." What has happened is much the same as
with the old superstition that it is unlucky to pass under a
ladder. People now see that a good reason for not doing it is that
the man who does not keep clear of a ladder raised against a
building is apt to get drips of paint or bricks dropped on him. In
the same way they discover that sound moral law is a sanitation-
regulation of the social life.

     The irony of paying attention to the Romanist version of the
old apologetic, which is the noisiest of them all, is that the
Papal Church promotes sound character even less than the other
Christian Churches. Middle-class folk, to which class most writers
belong, argue on these matters in the most slovenly fashion. Their
acquaintance with Catholics is confined to their class, and in this
they meet many Catholic men and women of admirable character. So,
they lazily conclude, Catholicism molds character. Middle-class men
who are not puritans have insisted to me -- two of them were
attorneys -- that they find Catholic girls easier to persuade or
less in need of persuasion than other girls. But let us remember,
the nature of the Church as I analyzed it. Of the 100,000,000 or so
adult subjects of the Pope at least 80,000,000 have not the least 



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               11

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

resemblance to the middle-class American or British Catholic. Half
of them are imperfectly civilized Latin Americans (with Cuba and
the Philippines) and most of the remainder are illiterate or poor
and ignorant Spaniards, Italians, Portuguese, Slovaks, etc.

     The general level of character in a nation is an elusive
factor but it is fairly determined, if we make allowances for
police-conditions, by the volume of crime. Criminal behavior in the
extreme form of unsocial conduct, and the number of criminals is a
good indication of the amount of unsocial conduct generally. If,
therefore, we find, as we do, that Catholic countries are more
criminal than non-Catholic, and that as a mixed country a quite
disproportionate number of the criminals are Catholics, we must
conclude that the Church is no more effective in inspiring sound
social behavior than in securing the chastity about which it talks
so much.

     I have given a few statistics in book No. 13. As Catholics are
apt to contest this I may add a few more. In No. 23 of his
Questions and Answer (p. 87) Haldeman-Julius gives, from a book by
a Catholic prison chaplain (Fr. Leo Kalmer, Crime and Religion) a
most damning series of figures. The priest ascertained from his
colleagues the percentage of Catholics in 36 American
penitentiaries and the result extends to the whole of America the
truth disclosed in the figure's I gave for Sing Sing (48.50 percent
in Joliet, 46.92 in San Quentin, 57.31 in Auburn, 63.64 in
Wethersfield, etc.). Analysis by the Rev. L.B. Lehmann brings out
the fact that in 28 states, in which Catholics are 17 percent of
the population, they are 33 percent of the criminals. The whole
article in Haldeman-Julius' book should be read.

     The only other mixed states for which exact comparative
figures are available are the Commonwealth of Australia and the
Dominion of New Zealand. In the case of Australia the figures are
particularly interesting because the Roman Church has as much power
there as in America and is just as blatant in its claims. It is 36
years since I first reproduced the full figures relating to crime
and Catholicism in that country, and I have brought them up to date
every few years. They are as damning as those of America, yet
Catholics continue to claim in the most brazen manner that they
guard the foundations of the state by promoting character.

     The Queensland State Schools Defense Fund issued a leaflet
quoting the figures from the official publications. This showed
that in Victoria in 1936 the Catholic prisoners numbered 2,164,
whereas since the Catholics are only 18 percent of the population,
their ought to have been only 754 Catholic prisoners if their moral
quality was equal to that of non-Catholics. In New South Wales they
had 454 prisoners instead of the 145 to which their percentage of
the population entitled them. In Queensland the disproportion was
the same. In the Commonwealth Catholics, mostly Irish, had three
times the number of criminals they ought to have had if they were
as good as and no better than their neighbors. As Catholics in
Queensland had just published a new demand for the preferential
treatment of their schools, the Protestants retorted humorously
that they ought themselves to receive preferential treatment in the
matter of taxation because they maintain extra police and jails to
look after Catholic criminals.

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               12

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

     In 1937 Archbishop Mannix, the bitter muddle-headed Irishman
who in his very Christian hatred of England used all the influence
of the Church to induce Australian's to confine themselves to their
pleasures and dollar-making while Britain fought and suffered for
ideals -- until the hideous face of the Japs appeared on the
horizon and Australia cried frantically to America and Britain for
help -- made one of his usual attacks on the public schools of
Australia. They were demoralizing even Catholic boys. He said this
in Melbourne (Victoria). Shortly afterward's the Report of the
Victorian Children's Courts for 1937 was published. Of 973 child
delinquents it appeared that 582, or 37.4 percent were Roman
Catholics; and Catholics are only 18 percent of the population of
Melbourne.

     That is typical of the value, of these loudly-shouted claims
of Catholic apologists. They know that none of the papers will test
the claims by statistical or historical facts, and that letters to
the press which do this will be suppressed as "offensive to
Catholics." The Protestant Watchman of New South Wales in 1941.
published, an analysis of the space given in the four daily papers
of Sydney to Catholic and Protestant affair's respectively. In a
period of three months the Roman Catholics got 491 inches, the
Church of England 280 (if we count out a large photo with the queen
in it), and the Methodists and Presbyterians 186. Is Sydney a
Catholic city? Far from it. The Roman Church controls only 17
percent of the population: the Church of England 40 percent: the
Methodist and Presbyterians 14 percent. But the arms of the Black
Octopus are everywhere, strangling freedom and truth, from the
office of the cabinet minister or the trade union to the editorial
office and the public libraries.

     Most countries do not now publish the figures of the religious
professions of criminals, and full figures of crime in Catholic and
non-Catholic countries are not so easily obtained as one would
suppose. Few sociologists or criminologists omit to mention the
Church, and prominently, amongst the agencies which make for social
sanity and stability, but, though it will be understood that my
acquaintance with such literature is not complete, I do not know
one of them who dares to follow this up by examining the statistics
of crime and the profession's of criminals or the religious status
of the various countries.

     The article "Homicide" in the Encyclopedia of the Social
Sciences has a little merit in this connection. It quotes Ferri's
table showing the reduction of it in recent times in five of the
leading European countries by giving the percentage per 100,000 of
the population:

          Germany   1.0 in 1865-85  and  0.6 in 1906-10
          France    2.4 in 1827-31  and  1.4 in 1911-15
          England   8.1 in 1856-60  and  0.7 in 1906-10
          Spain     9.4 in 1881-85  and  5.2 in 1911-15
          Italy     12.2 in 1871-75 and  4.1 in 1911-15

     Italy, remember, was despotically ruled by the Papacy until
1870 and had an appalling record of crime to reduce. I may add that
crime doubled in a few years after the Fascists usurped power in it


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               13

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

and was not reduced when the Vatican made its corrupt bargain to
share the control. Spain and Italy were both predominantly Catholic
in the last century when they had such a high record of the gravest
crime, and the modern sociologist scorns the excuse of "the hot
blood of the south." I question the figure for Germany, as there
was no "Germany" only a number of separate states -- until 1871.
Bodis (in Mulhall's Dictionary of Statistics) gives this percentage
of trials for murder in 1876-84: United Kingdom 12, Germany 14,
France (still mainly Catholic) 23, Spain 105, Hungary 107, Italy
134. Add these to the figures I gave in No. 13, and you get such a
reply to the claim that Romanism promotes a high standard of
character that you wonder that any apologist has the effrontery to
make it.

     But all Catholics make it, and very emphatically, because it
is the only excuse they can provide for the politicians,
professors, and writers whom, in one way or other, they get to
praise the Church and denounce critics. If this claim is so
decisively disproved by the only exact test we can apply -- the
volume of crime in Catholic lands and the proportion of criminals
in mixed lands -- so decisively that no sociologist in America
thinks it prudent to discuss the matter, where must we look for
even a plausible bit of color for it? The language of Papal
encyclicals and the gorgeous comments of apologists on them suggest
that there might be more sincerity in the claim that the Church is
more effective in inspiring social justice. We will defer the
examination of this to the next chapter, but the reader will be
prepared to smile. Social justice in Italy, Vichy France, Spain,
Portugal, and Brazil as compared with America, Britain, Russia,
Denmark, Sweden, or Switzerland! It sounds like a bad joke.

     But what other test can we apply? Is the great 'service of the
Church that it provided, or moved the authorities to provide, free
education for the children of the workers? See the table of
steatitic of illiteracy which I gave in No. 13 (p. 21). They are
more damning than the statistics of crime or illegitimacy. Our
search for these massive social services of the Church begins to
remind us of that naughty definition of metaphysics -- looking in
a dark room for a black cat that isn't there. Let us, in order to
be quite just to our Catholic fellow-citizens, approach the subject
in a different way.


                           Chapter III

              THE WICKED WORLD EDUCATES THE CHURCH

     This ghastly war and the Fascist-Catholic conspiracy that led
to it interrupted an unsteady and unequal but very real and
Substantial advance of civilization in Europe and America. If my
readers are not tired of my giving proof of that, I am. I have
routed the Lippmanns and Spenglers who Strangely persuaded so many
to doubt it. I have riddled the sophistry of the novelty-monger and
pseudo-idealists who ranted that in our race to get ahead we had
created a monster of the Frankenstein order or had let the
cultivation of our intelligence outrun our cultivation of
character. The revelation of the share of "our two historic 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               14

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

religions" in drenching the planet with mud and blood ought to make
these prophets of the spiritual feel small, but I notice in the
American press that they are as cocky as ever, and our Joads in
Britain orate at Empire Pageants. These people have nearly a
monopoly of the after-the-war planning which absorbs all our finer
spirits just now. They would return to just that distracting
activity of theirs under cover of which Japs and Germans shifted
the attention of the world from the real evils that menaced it.

     The world was making a very creditable progress on most lines
of a real advance of civilization, though it was checked by the
interests of wealth and religion, until the privileged folk and
their politicians were duped into thinking that the Black and Tang
(or yellows) were merely accumulating power in order to annihilate
the Reds. This progress became appreciable about 1870, when the
United States settled down after the Civil War and Europe
triumphed, in most countries, over the vicious clerical-royalist
reaction that had followed the fall of Napoleon. Briefly, the
period characterized not merely by an advance of from 1870 to 1914
was characterized, not merely by an advance of applied science
which more than doubled the wealth-reducing capacity of a nation
but by the employment of a very large part of the new wealth to
create systems of universal free education, an immense
multiplication of free libraries, the establishment in most
countries of fully democratic political regimes and the
enfranchisement of women, factory-legislation, schemes of old-age
pensions and health and unemployment insurance, sanitation, re-
housing, and other measures which doubled the average expectation
of life, a considerable growth of temperance (or temperateness),
and great reduction of crime, the doubling (generally) of real
wages, the enormous improvement of hospitals and services for the
distressed, and the spread of an anti-war sentiment.

     Some say that that is a materialistic conception of progress.
Most men and women in 1914 would have said that they did not care
a damn what you called it but that -- if they read a candid account
of life before 1870 -- the world, in spite of its lingering
defects, was a very much better place to live in. But let me again,
in passing, point out the humbug of this "spirit" and "matter"
business.

     I have just been reading, dreary as the occupation was, one of
those numerous recent works on the beauty of modern high-brow
Buddhism and how it will save the world. Out of the mush of
Verbiage I picked the general statement that the Supreme aim of
Buddhism is "the extinction of suffering." Funny. That is exactly
the supreme aim of atheists and materialists. I pointed out years
ago that progress is not to be judged by some misty goal in the
clouds but by the success of a nation in reducing suffering. And
while a certain number of people in every generation can be
persuaded to lessen the risk of suffering for themselves by
despising the wicked world and its wine, women, and song, and
retiring to a semi-nudist colony to contemplate their navels --
which seems to be Buddhism -- it seems to us atheists and
materialists far better to remove or reduce as much as possible the
sources of suffering (disease, poverty, war, ignorance, etc.) for
millions of people.


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               15

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

     Talking of our navel-contemplators, I fancy you will find a
little irrelevance well worth inserting here. I do not know whether
you ever came across a priceless book published nine years ago by
Professor T. O'Conroy. It ought to have been reprinted in 1938 and
scattered by the million over America, at the time, when the Japs
were spending millions a year in lying propaganda. O'Conroy lived
in Japan, teaching in one of the leading universities, for 15
years. He married an aristocratic Japanese lady and was more
intimately admitted to Japanese life than any other white man. And
in 1933 he wrote this scalding indictment of the nation, showing
that for corruption, cruelty, and unscrupulousness the Japs could
not be beaten. Buddhism, he shows, fully shared this corruption,
though it was at that time -- the government had not yet invited it
to prostitute itself to the national greed -- a fat, indolent, and
useless body. But what I want to quote is an illustration of its
corruption which he gives (pp. 87-8) and which, sensational as it
is, like the similar revelation in German monasteries, I have not
seen reproduced or referred to since in American literature or
journalism.

     A few mile's from Tokyo was a large and rich monastery of what
was understood to be the very strictest sect of Buddhist monks.
They were so holy that they closed their doors against the wicked
world and wanted to be alone. But in their extensive grounds there
was a home for feeble-minded women, tended by the good monks, and
a rumor spread in Tokyo that numbers of these unfortunates were
just unwanted wives whose husbands paid the monks to take them
over. A Tokyo paper organized a raid in 1928, and though the police
at once suppressed it, published an amazing story. The Buddhist
monastery was a colony of sadists, just as the German Franciscan
friars were found to be colonies of sodomists. When the raiders
burst in they found the monk-keepers gambling and squabbling with
blood-splotched paper money, while the women, half mad or half
dead, lay about, mutilated, exhausted, fouled with the monks'
excrements. Women were chained even in the temple, and rape, sexual
mutilation, and ignominy were but a few of the foul performances
that took place." And this is the second greatest "spiritual"
religion of our time: the religion over which our idealists and
scorners of materialism go into ecstasies!

     Like the monasteries in the Catholic provinces of Germany and
the more Catholic republics of South and Central America and the
Philippines, these Buddhist monasteries -- O'Conroy says that
decent Buddhist priests told him that 60 to 80 percent of their
body were corrupt -- illustrate what is always likely to happen in
medieval conditions; that is to say, wherever the monastery is
surrounded by a drowsy or drugged population of believers free from
the taint of heresy. It was the normal condition of Catholic
monasteries throughout the Middle Ages, and it lingered, as in
Germany, Italy, Spain, Portugal, Spanish America, and the
Philippines, wherever this parasitic Catholic atmosphere lingered.
This is the first broad proof that the Church was taught sense and
virtue by what it calls the wicked world or the materialistic age.

     An examination of the progress and the causes of social reform
in each country would clinch this proof, but obviously a
satisfactory treatment of that subject would require a large 
volume; and, as it is one of those inquiries that the Church does

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               16

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

not like, no historian or sociologist has taken it up and there is
no work to recommend to the reader. I have, as some readers will
know, not only given a large amount of material for the study in
previous works but have written one in which enough of the evidence
is condensed to satisfy any candid inquirer (How Freethinkers Made
Notable Contributions to Civilization, Haldeman-Julius Co. 1938).
In this work I examined the record of progress, particularly during
the last 100 years, in respect of the struggle for freedom,
education, social and political rights, the emancipation of woman,
philanthropy, and general improvement, and I showed that, while in
those days religious folk, though by no means so lenient to
Catholics as they now are, at least thought them an immeasurably
larger and more respectable body than freethinkers, yet fully one
half the pioneers in all reforms were freethinker's and none were
Catholics.

     You wonder what Catholic apologists, loudly claiming that the
Church leads in progress and civilization, say to that. The answer
is: Nothing, as far as I can discover. I have several times quoted
a very popular apologetic work, published under the patronage of
heads and professors of several American universities, entitled The
Calvert Handbook of Catholic Facts. It ought to say "of Catholic
Rhetoric" or "Catholic Lies." It makes the usual generalized claims
but, as the Church must have exerted this mighty influence on
progress and civilization through definite individuals, the leaders
of chief workers in reform-movements, I look for the names of these
-- and find none. There is a lot about Catholic relatives of
Presidents, rich Catholic men of business, Catholic diplomatists,
Catholic judges, and so on, but for every Catholic named as a
worker in reform-movements I will undertake to name a hundred
skeptics.

     There is in the book an article on Catholics who contributed
to American civilization in particular or civilization in general.
It names Sobieski, whose monument is Poland, Ferdinand and
Isabella, whose monument is Spain, and the discoveries of America,
who would have gone to the stake if they had not professed
Romanism. That covers the later Middle Ages. Then we have a Father
White, who is said to have set up the first printing press (from
England) in America, another who was great at shorthand in its
infancy, another who invented a balloon; and another who (getting
the idea from England) built the first railroad in America. Two or
three are credited with naval and military distinction, and there
is the usual bunch of great Catholic scientists (Pasteur, Fabre,
etc.) most of whom were skeptics. There are the men who wrote
"Maryland" and "The Conquered Banner," the architect of the White
House, the man who sold the estate for it, and the man who planned
the city of Washington (a "majestic plan"). There you have the
sweepings of three centuries, from Europe as well as America. They
do not represent a small body of Quakers or still smaller body (at
that time) of freethinkers but the biggest religion in the world.

     Did anybody ever say that no Catholic ever won any sort of
distinction, even in shorthand, ballooning, or writing songs? We
are familiar with Catholics writing any sort of tripe for their own
hypnotized people, but this sort of thing is written for non-
Catholic Americans and has the patronage of Nicholas Murray Butler 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               17

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

and the President of the Carnegie Institute of Technology. The
great work for civilization was achieved from 1870 onward. How many
of these illustrious Catholics fall in that period? Only the
balloonist as far as I can see. We may admit that gas and hot air
are entitled to clerical respect, but what the Catholic apologist,
claims is the inspiration of our progress in education, the
reduction of social service. How many of crime, and poverty, and
suffering these brilliant men figure in those fields? Not one.

     Let us try another way. As the Jesuits are supposed to have
inspired Jefferson and Adams, who loathed Jesuits and their creed
as much as Haldeman-Julius does, perhaps it will be claimed that it
was the subtly compelling influence of Papal encyclicals that
permeated the world and somehow fired large bodies of men and women
(mostly skeptics) to devote their lives to ridding the world of its
medieval evils and miseries. This would be very singular when we
reflect that of those who are supposed to be the closest readers of
the encyclopedias, the priests, not one -- unless you want me to
count Father Coughlin -- figures in the long list of reform-
leaders, and not one Catholic layman is found in any list of, say,
the hundred leading social workers of the 19th Century. The
influence of religion on leader's of reform is one of those studies
which our sociologists carefully avoid, though most of them give
religion a high-place in the list of inspirational agencies, but I
have made the research elsewhere, and the grotesque scratchings in
the byways of history of the Calvert Handbook confirm me. The Papal
encyclicals moved the world to great deeds and through atheists and
Quakers! Really, apologists ought not to advertise so blatantly
what they think of Catholic intelligence.

     But what are these grand encyclicals (or "to the whole world")
letters of the Popes on social matters. Even a Catholic would beg
me not to go too far back, so let us begin about the beginning of
the modern progressive period. Pius IX (of "Blessed Memory," the
Catholic writer always adds, though Italians who knew him have
written some funny things about him) opened the series in 1864 with
the encyclical Quanta cura and the Syllabus. Your apologists now
never mention it. He, having still at that time the reactionary
French emperor to protect him against the wicked Italians, scorched
the whole reform-movement with the choicest Papal invectives. He
put "liberalism," which we now call pink tea, on a level with
Satanism, which is several notches lower than rape.

     Then came the great encyclical-writer Leo XIII. He was as fond
of writing encyclicals as Churchill is of writing speeches. Two of
them are still gorgeously praised -- and falsely interpreted -- In
American Catholic literature. But just keep your eye on the dates
and the historical background. Leo won the tiara in 1878, when the
reform-movement was full on in Europe. America he knew only as a
raw outpost of civilization -- I suspect he knew it mostly from
Dickens's Letters and Martin Chuzzlewit -- and he had many a brush
with its bishops, but he did follow social and political movements
in Europe. Yet it was not until thirteen years after his accession
that he issued the first encyclical which the most ingenious
apologist can call socially inspiring. He had not been silent. In
1878 he had issued an encyclical cursing Socialism root and branch.
Next year he had imposed the medieval "philosophy of Aquinas on the


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               18

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

Catholic world. In the following year he had thundered at the
world, which was reforming its marriage-laws, that divorce was a
mortal sin (except in the ingenious form in which rich Catholics
can get it from Rome). In 1881 he pointed out, apropos of the
assassination of the Tsar, that these appalling outrages were due
to the decay of religion (not, of course, to the bestiality of the
Tsarist regime), and in 1884 he put Freemasonry Under the ban. In
1885 he issued the Immortale Dei, which Ryan still applauds as a
fine democratic appeal; and I have shown that it is nothing of the
kind. In 1888 he savagely attacked the claim of religious freedom
and liberty of discussion. It was not until 1891, when he saw
Socialism gaining ground rapidly at the expense of the Church, that
he issued the one encyclical, Rerum novarum, which Catholics claim
to give a lead in social reform; and the only "revolutionary"
sentence in it was the statement that the workers must have a
living wage. (which he refused to define), which had been a
platitude of liberal literature for half a century. And in his last
beautiful messages to the world he retracted this and died
sputtering the most reactionary sentiments.

     I pass on the next two Popes. Ryan does not quote them. They
were stuffy and ill-informed reactionaries all their lives. And in
1931 the late Pope, or the present Pope writing in his name issue
the Fascist encyclical Quadragesimo anno which the British and
American hierarchies dare not translate into English! It opened the
blatantly Fascist, conspiratorial, warmongering career of his
"holiness" Pius XII.

     Need I point the moral? The Papacy was throughout the whole
period the enemy of progress of the rights of the people. It was
just compelled for a time to temporize because it looked even to
these owlish Italians priests as if democracy had won its war and
the world was adopting the liberalism in social matters which the
Popes scorned. Yet even when concessions had to be made to check
the leakage of millions of workers from the Church they took only
the feeble form of saying that if the French people really insisted
on having a republic they might, provided it kept the Catholic
Church established by law and that capitalists must grant their
workers a "just wage," which it was left to them to determine.

     What do I mean then, you will ask, by saying that the wicked
world educated the Church? The Popes apparently, never were
educated in sound views of social ethics. What I mean is that in
America, Britain, France, Germany, and Italy a social-democratic
movement (without the capital letters) spread in the Catholic world
after 1900. Quite bold books appeared, and there were "social
experts" and all sorts of novelties. What was the inspiration?
Evidently it did not come from the Papacy. Had local hierarchies
and their Ryans and Williams a finer appreciation of the
implications of the faith than the Holy-Ghost-inspired Pope's and
all the great theological geniuses of the Middle Ages?

     Enough of this nonsense. The plain truth is that after leaving
it to non-Catholics for a century, when the work was heart-breaking
and the penalty often death or jail, to break the paths of social
and humanitarian reform, the local Black International in some
countries concluded that in the interest of the Church they must 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               19

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

join in the work. It was a death-bed repentance. But the patient
recovered. That is to say, the Black International, which for a
time had despaired of life on the old lines of privilege and
autocracy, saw a new hope in the rise of Fascism and became
convinced that it was going to conquer the world. So the death-bed
confession of sin was torn up in Rome and in all countries that
passed under the pirate-flag, and it is only in one or two
countries like America and Britain, where democracy may survive and
may even regain the world, where in any case Catholics are a
minority and must behave like the Japanese in California or Oregon,
that one still hears how freedom and democracy are grand old
Catholic ideas conveyed to a wicked and despairing world by the
august, and fearless, and un-compromising encyclicals of the Popes.


                           Chapter  IV

        THE CONTRAST OF RUSSIA AND PRIEST-RULED COUNTRIES

     While the services rendered by the Church to civilization are
as hard to find as the black cat in a dark room, the services it
rendered to the repulsive forces which have attempted to wreck
civilization are as plain as the peaks of the Rockies. The
alliances contracted by the Vatican with Italy, Japan, and Germany
are events of recent history like the New Deal or the Atlantic
Charter. The dates and terms of the agreements are public property.
But one service requires special consideration: the organization of
the entire resources of the Church to engender hatred of Communism
in general and of Russia in particular.

     This service began, explicitly as far as the documents I have
seen tell us, in 1936, though the Vatican had begun its furious
attack upon Communism and even, in effect, its appeal for a crusade
against it, much earlier. From 1919 to 1924 the Pope was, we saw,
straining, every nerve to get on friendly terms with Soviet Russia
so as to bring under his control the Orthodox Church when its
leaders were scattered. The Russians repeatedly detected the
Catholic clergy in treachery and in 1924 closed the country against
missionaries from Rome. So in December of that year Pius XI, who
had hitherto in great charity kept in check his hatred of
Communism, attacked it in his Consistorial Allocution (December 18)
and called the attention of all "heads of "governments" to the
danger of it. He, in fact, coupled Socialism with Communism as
equally dangerous. In 1931 he, we saw, ordered all Catholic states
(in encyclical Quadragesimo anno) to adopt the Fascist state and
sternly forbade Catholics to take up either Socialism or Communism.
He said that Communism had brought "massacres and ruin upon Eastern
Europe." This attack on Russia seems to have been taken up or
fostered by his representatives everywhere, as on December 30,
1932, the British Daily Worker said that "the clergy of all creeds
and denominations are, with religion as their pretext following the
lead of the Pope in his call for a crusade against the U.S.S.R."

     The direct and more pointed attack began, however, in 1936,
shortly after the outbreak of Franco's rebellion in Spain. We must
remember that Italy and Germany were not at that time open allies
of Franco, and America and Britain had not declared their attitude 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               20

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

to what everybody still called a rebellion. But there was no
reserve at Rome. In a blistering and most untruthful attack on
Communism, which he represented as the aggressor in Spain, the Pope
spoke of it as a force that was attempting to subvert established
order of every kind from Russia to China, from Mexico to South
America." From this year onward he appealed repeatedly for "the
extinction" of Bolshevism in Spain, Mexico, and Russia, and, as we
saw, "he holy cry for blood was taken up in the Catholic section of
every country.

     When the Czecho-Slovakian crisis, which might be called the
first stage of the world-war, arose in 1938 the service that the
Vatican and its Black International in every country had already
rendered the imperialist thugs by this propaganda was apparent.
Joint action at once by Britain, France, and Russia would have
strangled Hitlerism in its cradle and put a cheek to the ambitions
of Japan. But Britain was under obligation only to support France,
and France was persuaded by its Catholic politicians and military
leaders, the present Vichy crowd, that Russia could not be trusted
to keep its word: in reality, that active partnership with so
disreputable a power and helping it to cheek the strength of
Germany must not be undertaken by France. As late as 1940 British
generals of the stuffy Tory type were saying: "We may have to ally
our selves with Russia, but God forgive us." That contemptuous
attitude the Black International fed in every country for ten
years, to the very great profit of the bandits.

     We admit the double root of this hatred of Russia, or the
capitalist and the Catholic roots, but we have to recognize this
difference: that the capitalists, who make no pretence of moral
principle, are honest opponents of a dangerous rival system,
whereas the priests, who profess to be the moral saviors of a
wicked world lie about their motives and by their action run the
risk of bringing upon civilization precisely that ruin which they
untruthfully accused the Communists of contemplating. The Pope's
outburst in 1936 which I quoted in an earlier book and which was
clearly written by the present Pope as Secretary of State, was a
tissue of untruthful charges. Instead of trying to "subvert
established order of every kind" by "an un-parallel confusion of
forces so savage and cruel as to have been thought utterly
incompatible" -- whatever the last phrase may mean -- Russia had by
1936, as the whole world knew, wrought a miracle of the creation of
order out of chaos. In 1923, as a result of the European War, the
Civil War, and the great famine, Russia had been reduced to a
condition of disorder and misery which had not been seen in Europe
since the end of the Thirty Years War (1648). The restoration began
in earnest a few years later, and by 1936 the most respected writer
of Britain and America reported, with a few reserves, that the
Soviet government had, especially in regard to the reduction of
crime and the establishment of social order, won a remarkable
victory.

     Apologists in America had generally, to be less wild than the
Pope in their indictment of Russia, but they were reckless enough.
The old lies about the massacre of priests and the persecution of
religion flourished in Catholic literature from year to year; in
fact, there is good ground to believe that the official 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               21

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

representatives of America demanded assurances on the latter point
when they began to negotiate with Russia about military aid. The
conspiracies in which some of the leading Bolsheviks were involved
were eagerly snapped up as proof that the country was ruled by a
murderous bureaucracy, whereas we now have the weighty assurance of
Duranty (with a reserve in one case) and Ambassador Davies that the
men were certainly guilty. Davies himself repeats a perennial libel
in saying that the Russians are lamentably inefficient as compared
with the Americans and the British. He has had the cruel experience
of seeing his book appear, with this reproach, just at the time
when the world had proof before it daily of the relative efficiency
of the British and the Russian military machine.

     There are two plain reasons for the sacred fury of the Church
against Russia, and the first is entirely discreditable. It is
because the attack upon Russia brought the Black International into
line with wealth and privilege in accordance with its old and
unwavering tradition. For an attack upon the Communist political
system the Church has no ground whatever since it declares that it
never interferes in politics. And when it plans its attack on
economic ground's it recognizes that it can make no distinction
between Communism and Socialism, since the degree of socialization
is not a matter of moral principle. But its claim that any moral
principle at all is involved is ludicrous. Ryan is very eloquent on
the moral right of private ownership: he is, in fact so sure of it
that he says a Socialist government would be a violation of moral
law, and Catholic Americans would be justified in rebelling against
it. Piffle. A people has a right to choose its economic form just
as well as its political regime. The apologists who talk like this
are simply saying to the world's capitalists: The Church of Rome is
your friend so help to protect it from further decay.

     The second and stronger reason is the tremendous loss which
the spread of Communism had inflicted upon the Roman Church. I gave
the facts in the first book. The press and most writers conceal
them and leave the fierce hostility of Rome to Russia not very
intelligible and cover up the vast amount of harm that the Vatican
did by spreading it's hatred over the world, yet Rome itself is
much more ready to admit this motive than to talk about its support
of the capitalist system. It, of course, does not speak of losses.
With its usual complete indifference to truthfulness it invites the
world to unite against Russia because it "attacks religion." All
criticism of the Catholic Church or telling the people the truth
about its history and its aims is "an attack" but criticism by the
Church of other Churches or philosophies is, however acrid and
untruthful it may be, just a kindly warning to the world of the
dangers that surround it.

     We may readily admit that for many years the Soviet government
gave every assistance to the voluntary organization that opened the
eyes of the people, but this official cooperation had ceased at the
time when the Vatican was shrieking about attacks on religion, and
in the other countries (Italy, France, Germany, Spain, and Spanish
America, etc.) in which the advance of Socialism and Communism
detached tens of million# from the Roman Church there was certainly
no official encouragement of the movement. The mechanism of
propaganda was a substitution of facts for lies, of knowledge for 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               22

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

ignorance. The policy of the Church when the Fascist reaction began
in each country sufficiently proves this. It closed the schools,
suppressed freedom of discussion, and strangled literature; and it
filled the jails with the men and women who had been most prominent
in exposing the clergy, and it had, and continues to have,
thousands of them labelled Communists and shot.

     We talk about the blindness of men in the red haze of war, but
the third year of this most terrible of all war's has been, to the
intense mortification of the Black International, a year of
illumination. Self-interest has, of course, helped the British and
Americans to surmount the prejudices that have been pumped into
them by press, pulpit, literature, and the cinema for 20 years, but
it will hardly be questioned that the magnificent conduct of the
Russian people has been the main fact that opened the eyes of folk
to their great qualities and the soundness of their system. Right
until the hordes of Nazi tanks, set free by the absence of any
opposition on the western front, were within a few hours run of
Leningrad and Moscow, Britons and Americans were whispering that of
course the Russian people would not fight with real devotion and
the requisite energy for a government that usurped power, treated
them despotically and mercilessly, and robbed them of their
previous religion. Novels, the class-books of so many millions,
still circulated in which the Commissars and leading officials were
represented as sadistic monsters who lived on champagne, caviar,
and Christian virgins.

     History has rarely seen such a revulsion of sentiment, such a
triumph over two decades of priestly and aristocratic slander, as
has happened in the last six months. Conservative leaders now speak
in public about "our noble Russian ally," and deputies from Russia,
who only six months ago were admitted at the back doors, so to
speak, are received with royal hands. And it is only in the last
few months that the press or most of it -- many papers still crab
at Russia and frown on the popular enthusiasm -- has supported the
change of heart. In England most of the cinemas still treat Russia
as a power which it would be indecent to obtrude upon the notice of
a Christian people. Bands at Anglo-Russian functions are forbidden
to play the Communist national anthem, and rich if small
organizations continue to publish the old libels. But, the facts
have for the vast majority of people swept away the long-standing
prejudices as the first warm rains of spring wash away the snows.

     The next step will be for the public to reflect how it has
been systematically duped over a long series of years. The share of
the Black International in this has been so conducted that most
people are unaware of it, but the truth slowly emerges and Rome
shudders. The Pope, we saw, already puts out rumors that in his
intimate circle he, from the first, drew a sharp distinction
between what he blamed in Russia, which was virtuous on the wrong
grounds, and what he blamed in Germany and Italy. But no one has
read a line in which he gave a straight moral condemnation of the
Fascists and the Nazis -- he never blamed more than their
interference with the Church and the attempt to annihilate Catholic
Poland -- whereas the Catholic authorities themselves translated
and circularized the vicious, vitriolic speech on the Communists of
Spain, Mexico, and Russia, which he delivered on September 14, 
1936, (The Spanish Terror).

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               23

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

     Into whatever contortion the Black International is driven in
the next few years the world is confronted today by a situation
which sets in a glorious light all that the Pope cursed and casts
a shade of ignominy and cowardice upon all that he blessed. Russia
shines, and even China wins honor and admiration: the two chief
countries in which the Pope had seen the activity of the devil:
Spain, the Land which his shining Catholic crusaders were going to
deliver from bondage and misery, is a country of spectral forms and
general mourning, a land in which innocent men face the firing-
squad daily, while the priests wax fatter, and the Catholic
"nobles" and politicians do actually carouse in Madrid as the
Bolshevik leaders were represented by the Pope's agents as doing in
Moscow.

     Portugal, we saw on the authority of a writer whom American
Catholics had imprudently recommended as veracious, is a country in
which priest-ridden jailers use the vilest tortures that were used
in the ages of faith: in which decades of Liberal work for the
education and elevation of the people have been trodden under foot,
and the dictators are richly rewarded by Rome because they declare
that they are ruling Portugal on the lines of the Pope's beautiful
(but untranslated) encyclical.

     Italy, dragged at the heels of Hitler's bumping chariot, is in
so pitiful a condition that it wins the sympathy of its democratic
enemies. From his own Vatican windows the Pope looks out upon a
people that in a very high proportion curses the man whom the
Vatican, by a sordid bargain, confirmed in his usurped power.
London, the bombed and ravaged city, is gay with confidence, well
fed, richly entertained at nights, reflecting the summer sun on the
faces of its citizens. Rome is beggared and dejected, despised and
bullied by the men who invited it to share the conquest of the
world.

     Vichy France is sullen and simmering. The myth that it was
somehow ruled against its will by a posse of Jews, Atheists, and
Freemasons and would, under such men of piety as Laval and Petain,
flock cheerfully to the churches, is exploded. From Normandy to
Savoy people sigh for deliverance from the regime of Catholicism
and dishonor, rusticity and penury, which has been forced upon
them. The French people have provided most of the $10,000,000,000
worth of loot that the blond beasts, whom the Black International
persuaded the French to admit, have dragged in French cars on
French petrol into Germany. Never since its earliest history has
proud France fallen so low as it is today, and it shudders to think
that it may not have reached the end of its humiliating surrender.
No people in the world today respects France -- except priest-
ridden Quebec.

     Belgium lies under an almost impenetrable cloud, earning its
dry bread only by working for the master whom it has for quarter of
a century hated more than any other on earth. Austria has perished.
It is again the despised southern fringe of the German Reich. The
Croats, who were persuaded by their priests to betray their
country, fight the men to whom they betrayed it because they were
the Pope's allies. The Slovaks who were similarly persuaded to
complete the ruin of the country in which they had, enjoyed freedom


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               24

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

and social welfare now melt away on the battlefield of Russia.
Latin America, the huge conglomeration of states which at the wave
of Pacelli's white hand declared itself Catholic, once more, is
rent and bewildered. The Pope's allies, the people find, had
plotted to ruin them and now hang about their shares with murderous
intent. And Germany and Japan, on whose success the Pope had
gambled the whole security of his Church, seem to have reached the
peak of their victories and have begun the decline that leads to
the pit in which the fully developed strength of America, Russia,
and Britain is bound to bury them.


                            Chapter V

        THE MONSTROUS ATTEMPT TO RESTORE THE MIDDLE AGES

     The treacherous irruption by night of Japan into the war has
transformed it into the phenomenon which has been forecast, with
heavy foreboding, for 20 years -- a world-war. Almost the entire
civilized world is now involved in it. A few powers -- Sweden,
Switzerland, Turkey, and Argentina -- are genuinely neutral, but,
however clearly we may understand the difficulties of their
position, no one regards it as an honorable distinction. The rest
of the civilized world is divided into countries which live under
the most hated emblems the world has seen for many centuries -- the
Swastika and the Rising Sun (for Italy writhes under the former of
these) -- and countries which are sworn to bring them down to the
dust.

     Apart from Latin America, which is, as I said, distracted
between its Papal assurances and the discovery of the perfidy and
brutality of the Pope's allies, all Catholic countries fall in the
first category. Their national flags where they still have any,
are, if not deeply stained with dishonor, generally regarded with
contempt or a pity that is tinged with disdain. There can be few
more miserable statesmen in the world than Eugene Pacelli, or His
Holiness Pius XII. Ten years ago he pledged his Church to a belief
in the ultimate victory of Germany, Italy, and Japan. In the ruin
of all liberal, as well as Socialist and Communist, ideals which
they would effect no strong voice would be raised in protest,
against his alliance with a bestial greed that sought to attain its
end's by brutality almost without precedent in history. His
gauleiter and his gestapo would, as always, loyally support the
Vatican policy. The end justifies the means. As to the mass of the
faithful, when did any large body of them ever rebel when Pope and
Black International were united in their policy? And in the
glorious extension of the power and wealth of the Church, the
annihilation of its deadliest enemies, which the Pope anticipated
from the victory of Swastika and the Rising Sun few Catholics would
be in a critical mood.

     In the second stage of the war, when the Germans, finding
nearly all Europe in their power and confident of Subduing the
remainder, began to disclose their real sentiments about Italy --
which the Vatican ought to have learned from Mein Kampf 20 years
ago -- and proposed to share the world with Japan only, the Pope
had a new dream. It suited the interests of the Vatican just as
well as it was to the interest of Germany that Southern Europe 

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               25

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

should have its industries destroyed. Big industries mean clotted
urban populations, free discussion, freethought, birth control, and
so on. The Vatican had seen that painful development in France,
Belgium, Italy, and Czecho-Slovakia. The Black International was
ready to join in the plot to de-industrialize those countries and
let Germany glow rich by a monopoly of industry, in Europe. Petain,
with the priests at his elbow, openly mumbles it, in his senile
honesty, and has within the last month closed down a thousand
industries in France. Leopold of Belgium and his Catholic
satellites, Franco, and Salazar cheerfully send their skilled
workers to Germany or to the Russian shambles. Hitler would allow
a Catholic League of Southern Europe, and through Spain and
Portugal the 100,000,000 folk of Latin America would be drawn into
it. Hitler promised the Subjection to the Vatican of all branches
of the Greek and Oriental Churches. Japan promised a monopoly of
Christian missions (if thoroughly Japanized) in the Far East. . . 

     That these were the plans on which the Vatican worked I showed
on Catholic admissions and by the plain testimony of facts in the
first ten booklets. Already the vast field of Catholic triumph is
a scorched earth. The Pope is ill, silent, desperately watching the
last critical phases of a conflict that, unless it be won speedily 
by the Axis, will inexorably be lost. From those windows of the
Vatican Palace which look out upon the world he sees only one flag
waving above the ruins unsullied: the Hammer and Sickle. Britain
has won respect by the courage and endurance of her people but,
after a series of retreats that are rare in British history, has
still to, and doubtless will, redeem the honor of its flag. There
is a stain on the Stars and Stripes that has yet to be removed.
Russia. has made no large blunders but has met the initial impact
of an irresistible force and the loss of vast fertile provinces and
great industries and has begun its recovery with a devotion,
energy, and self-sacrifice that have torn the Pope's libels to
tatter's. Bring on your stage today representative figures of all
the Pope's peoples -- the pale and ragged Italian, the gaunt
Spaniard, the illiterate and poverty-stricken Portuguese, the
shame-faced Belgian or Vichy Frenchman, the hesitating Latin
American -- and at the end of the file bring on a Bolshevik, and
listen to the judgment of the audience. What the Pope cursed the
world blesses: what he blessed the world curses. The Pope has lost.

     But, aside from the fact that in America the Black
International is powerful enough to hide this truth from the mass
of people, remember that the Pope has lost dozens of times before,
yet he has today more subjects than ever, immeasurably greater
wealth, and a new power in non-Catholic countries.

     A week ago a powerful British air-fleet bombed Cologne. I had
wondered how long it would be before this was done. Here was one of
the most vital and most vulnerable bottle-necks in Europe. Through
it passed practically all the war-supplies from Holland, Belgium,
and Northern France. Thoroughly smash the railway through the city,
where it approaches the Rhine, and the great bridges, and you deal
Germany a terrific blow. But -- I once spent five or six weeks in
Cologne -- the cathedral is close to the railway and the bridges.
It was unhurt, and who will believe that the vital part of the
railway and the bridge which carries it over the river, which are 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               26

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

only a few hundred yards from the cathedral, were properly treated
if no bomb strayed across the square? I hear that, at the prayer of
British Catholics, our airman were told to run no risk of touching
the cathedral.

     Why was Rome never bombed? There were times when this was
within our power, and it might have had a very considerable
influence on our fortunes in the Mediterranean area. H.G. Wells
asked me the other day if I knew why it was not done. I do not
know. These things are not put on paper, and if they were the paper
would never see the light. But there is a grapevine, and the
message went along it that through Roosevelt American Catholics
threatened things, and there were Black International threats in
parts of the British Empire, if we bombed Rome. Mussolini probably
patted his Papal friend on the back.

     However these things may be, remember that Rome has many times
in history seemed to be doomed because of its Papal alliances with
brutality, but it recovered. About 850 years ago the Romans
themselves drove one of the strongest of the Popes into exile for
such an alliance. In 1527 Catholic armies wrecked Rome as Goths and
Vandals had never done. Early in the 19th Century, a contemporary
tells us, Napoleon's generals, entering Italy and carrying off the
Pope, decided that this was to be the end of the Papacy; and not
many years later Macaulay made his foolish prediction that there
would still be a Papacy when visitors from New Zealand came to see
the ruins of London.

     I dislike prediction's, and indeed I have accomplished the
work which I set out to do in this series of books. I proved to the
hilt the indictment I brought against the Black International, and
I have now shown that the Church of Rome is of such a nature, so
dangerous in its structure and so feeble in its intellectual
appeal, that it is bound to look for such allies in every age. A
third line of evidence is found in Papal history, especially during
the last century and a half. Violence has always -- I do not know
if this was in the protocols given by Jesus to Peter -- been the
policy on which the Black International relied. The Popes merely
kept the weapon tucked under their cassocks during the few decades
between the death of feudal tyranny and the birth of totalitarian
tyranny. The leopard does not change its spots, but it may have
them white-washed.

     Nevertheless I may conclude with a glance at the future. This
German-Japanese horror shall and will perish. As I write there is
still time for a serious setback to Britain, Russia, or America, or
all three. I have never been tempted to underrate the ability of
the men who, behind the miserable tinfoil Siegfried and his greedy,
friends, direct the German effort or the cunning and lean energy of
the Japanese. If this serious advance of the Axis does not occur in
the next few weeks we may breathe freely. Within, two further
months the retreat will begin. The end, this year (if Britain opens
a second front) or next, is certain.

     What will Rome do? Remember first that comparatively few
people know the story of its guilt. A few American papers have at
intervals reported Vatican events which suggested it. The vast 
majority of the leading papers, both in America and Britain, never 

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               27

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

gave any news which gave their readers an inkling of the truth.
Fortunately, much had been reported -- the compact with Mussolini,
the Concordat with Hitler, the enthusiastic support of Franco, the
diplomatic arrangement with Japan, and so on -- before the
bestiality of Fascism had revealed itself, and such facts as that
the only voluntary "crusaders" against Russia are from Catholic
countries and the unconverted isolationists of America play up
strongly to the Catholic minority, give us a basis in the Public
mind for a proper education.

     It is therefore probable that there will not be the general
outcry against Rome that a man who has read the full evidence
would. expect. No other writer of influence has the courage and
honesty to warn the public, as Wells does, that instead of having
been reconciled with the modern spirit the Church of Rome is as
dangerous an enemy of civilization as ever. One thing only would
cause the Church the deepest alarm: if the victory of democracy
were to put Communism and Socialism back in the places they
occupied years ago. Will this happen?

     It depends very largely upon America. When the war is over the
isolationists will be amongst the loudest to demand that America
shall have a leading voice in the settlement of Europe and China.
Every sensible man will welcome the aid of America in such a
restoration of Europe that, instead of sowing the dragon's teeth as
we did at Versailles at the close of the last war, we have every
guarantee that is humanly possible of a lasting peace. But the
terms of settlement that have been so far announced are ominously
vague, and we know only too well what "stability" means on the lips
of these folk.

     You will find, when the time comes, that the Vatican will make
a brazen attempt to secure a voice as one of the great stabilizing
forces. You will find Catholics everywhere combining with the
reactionaries who want to plan the new Europe. They will want
Leopold restored, men like Bonnet put in power in France Franco
firmly established in Spain and Salazar in Portugal, the royal
family propped on the throne of Italy, and so on. By hook or crook
they will try to get Russia, which will have won the war in Europe,
excluded from the settlement. They will insist that religion be
"strengthened," knowing that Romanism,, Buddhism, and Islam have
worked on the side of our enemies, and that Communism be taken at
the Pope's valuation. If the present generation tolerates these
things and does not insist on the guilt of every party being
stamped upon the mind of the world they will deserve their future.
The struggle for the rights of man which has reddened Europe with
blood for a century and a half will enter upon a new phase.



                          ****     ****


    Reproducible Electronic Publishing can defeat censorship.


                          ****     ****


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               28
                               
                               
                               
                               
                                                       28 page printout

    Reproducible Electronic Publishing can defeat censorship.

          This file, its printout, or copies of either
          are to be copied and given away, but NOT sold.

          Bank of Wisdom, Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                          ****     ****

Edited by E. Haldeman-Julius

THE BLACK INTERNATIONAL                 No. 19

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

        THE CATHOLIC CHURCH DOES FAR MORE HARM THAN GOOD

                        by Joseph McCabe

                  HALDEMAN-JULIUS PUBLICATIONS
                     GIRARD  -- : --  KANSAS

                          ****     ****

   CHAPTER

     I    Progress in Catholic and Non-Catholic Countries ..... 1

    II    The Black International always in the Rear .......... 8

   III    The Wicked World Educates the Church ............... 14

    IV    The Contrast of Russia and Priest-Ruled Countries .. 19

     V    The Monstrous Attempt to Restore the Middle Ages ... 25


                          ****     ****

                            Chapter I

         PROGRESS IN CATHOLIC AND NON-CATHOLIC COUNTRIES

     Throughout these ten booklets, in which I have shown that the
Church of Rome is the natural ally of the German, Japanese, and
Italians, I have asked the reader to see it as primarily a vast
economic corporation, the Black International, fighting for
survival, in an age in which educated people despise its doctrines
and all informed people loathe its methods. Whether any, or how
many, of this monstrous regiment of cardinals and bishops, priests
and monks, sincerely believe the medieval sophistication of ancient
Greek and oriental superstitions which they profess is here
entirely irrelevant. We are studying the Church as an institution
because we are trying to understand its action throughout the
world.

     It admits that it seeks wealth and power but insists that this
is only in order that it may more effectively promote what it calls
the spiritual and eternal interests of men. With that pretext also 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               1

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

we are not concerned. The apologist will hardly expect us to admit
that it entered into an alliance with (in this order) Italy, Japan,
and Germany because it believed they would help it to look after
the soul's of men. Such a plea would raise a broad grin from
Cologne to Tokyo. Those nations sought wealth and power; so did the
Bleak International. They meant to secure and protect this wealth
and power by a regime of bloody tyranny; and the Black
International, which has for 800 years relied upon that method,
needed it more urgently than ever. The bandits wanted the
international influence of the Vatican to help to dupe the world
about their designs; and they promised it a very large share of the
spoils of victory by annihilating its critic's and recovering its
lost provinces for it.

     After what we have seen that is as obvious as the Empire State
Building. Men of the Munich mentality as regards the Church of Rome
petulantly exclaim that it is a monstrous charge. Yes: and the war
and the Pope's share in it, the debasement of France by priest-
ridden traitors, and the horrors of the Spanish and Portuguese hell
are a monstrous reality. If these narrow-minded folk who think
themselves so superior to prejudice were to look facts in the face
they Would see that we accuse the Church of doing only what it has
done over and over again since the Albiginsian Massacre and the
founding of the Inquisition 700 years ago. They would find that the
Roman Black International is not the only spiritual army that has
prostituted itself for gold in our time.

     In 1937 there was a Parliament of Religions at Calcutta. The
report of the proceedings in two fat volumes makes a materialist
like myself blush. Representatives of all the world's religions and
sects joined enthusiastically in the good work, and the speeches
glitter like Woolworth jewelry with nice phrases about the
spiritual and the Ideal, the sins of men and the wickedness of the
world, the lofty morality by which these folk are going to save the
race. As you will remember, the Japs had by this time completely
enslaved and debauched Manchuria and the north of China and they
were openly gathering for their next orgy of brutality. And not a
single one of these Asiatic word-spinners of the hundred beautiful
religions said one single word about it. One foreigner, a British
professor, ventured to say ten very mild words about it.

     If you want to know why, though of course nobody did at the
time, it was not simply because people who live on these shining
heights find it difficult to see the common earth. It was mainly
because the Black International or Japanese Buddhism was doing in
Asia just what the Roman priests were doing in Europe and America.
We must not offend our Buddhist fellow-citizens.

     Some of my readers will remember that in 1937, while these
spiritual folk were having their jamboree in Calcutta and the
world-press was following their beneficent work with admiration. I
published, through Haldeman-Julius, a booklet with the title
Imperialistic Japan and its Aims. I described how by that time the.
criminal plot of the Japs was so far from being secret that scores
of patriotic societies, some with millions of member's, publicly
boasted of it and gloated over realistic pictures and panoramas
exhibited in the stores of the cities, of the destruction of the 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               2

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

American fleet. I gave the evidence that the Buddhist priests and
monks, 150,000 strong, had been bought by the government and the
capitalists and were conducting an intensive campaign all over
South Asia to create a Fifth Column for the "Japanese Liberator's."
They had been bought in cash, just as the Vatican had been bought
by Mussolini, and, like the Vatican, they looked for even greater
profit when the job was done.

     They earned their pay. Not only did they work up the Japanese
people to a fanatical enthusiasm for the plan of making themselves
rich by exploiting a third of the world but they created nests of
traitors from French Indo-China to the Persian Gulf. There were
10.000 Buddhist quislings in Rangoon alone and there were others in
key-positions all over Burma. Ceylon teems with them. For ten years
the work has proceeded under a very thin disguise of Buddhist
concern for the spiritual interests of men. Yet in a Parliament of
Religions held at Chicago in 1939 America had been emphatically
warned that these Buddhist priests had already grown fat on
imperialist gold.

     While disreputable atheists and materialists like Haldeman-
Julius and McCabe, who told the world the truth, were very properly
ignored by all respectable folk these spiritual gasbags, who
blinded it to the realities of life, where loaded with laurels and
dollars. It is nice, and so profitable, to be profound and
spiritual!

     However. Immense as is the work which I bring to a close with
this booklet I have no space to enlarge, upon even so important a
side-issue as the corruption of Buddhism (which was quite willing
in every age to entertain a business proposition) by the fine
imperialist's of Japan. It is enough that "our two great religions"
have made a mockery of every compliment, that every long-haired
idealist in America had lavished upon them. They have prostituted
themselves to the Butchers Union, while atheistic Russia, upon
which most of these idealists have poured abuse for the last twenty
years, has won a splendid tribute from a disillusioned world. But
I have still an important point to make in regard to the Church of
Rome to complete the explanation of its behavior.

     In his recent work, 'You Can't Be Too Careful,' H. G. Wells
says: "The most evil thing in the world today is the Roman Catholic
Church." It is also one of the most respected things in the world
today, especially in America. But there is no mystery about the
respect, the power, even the adulation which it enjoys. It commands
about 10,000,000 votes, nicely bunched together for the most part
in certain states and at the disposal of the priests. It has
$4,000,000,000 invested, an income of about $1,000,000,000 and an
army of about quarter of a million paid agents of one kind or
other. It has a very large press and radio-service. It has about
5,000,000 auxiliary troops, open fanatics and secret intriguers,
sworn to promote "the welfare of the Church." It has immense
opportunities of rewarding loyalty, from a Papal Knighthood to a
job as janitor. It has a control of editors, politicians, writers,
libraries, cinemas, radio programs, owners of halls and theaters,
professors, booksellers, even the police, the public school's,



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               3

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

parole-boards, the mails, etc. It has . . . But maybe that will do.
What we had better ask is what excuse is made for themselves by the
politicians, professors, and others who chant the praises of "the
venerable Church."

     You know it. They reply that the Church does good -- oh, an
enormous amount of good: so much, in fact, that it is one of the
foundations of the state. In a recent book (Mission to Moscow),
which the pious Mr. Gollancz spreads in England, Ambassador Davies,
discussing the vices and virtues of Russia, says that with all its
faults it must not be classed with Germany and Italy, as a
totalitarian state. Phew! Are there still folk who talk like that?
However, what Mr. Davies mean's is that the Russian state is, and
the Nazi state is not, "based upon the altruistic principles of the
Christian religion." If that is true of Russia -- if you will
pardon the supposition -- how far more true it must be of the
American civilization with its 100,000 parsons and its more
brilliant exhibition of those principles. And of the Churches which
render this inestimable service the Church of Rome is immeasurably
the greatest: the Church that regards all the others with
contemptuous tolerance and pronounces them rebellious and
ineffective offshoots of the age-old Church on which the sun never
sets.

     In western stories, of which I am fond, I often read in
descriptions of cow-town of the "false front" of the bank. the
saloon, and the store. The phrase fits the Roman Church In America,
for it is, to Americans, the false front of the international Papal
Church. That is why so many Americans hesitate in face of the most
conclusive evidence to admit the charge we bring against the Black
International. Why, they say, this is the Church that first raised
the banner of religious freedom on American soil: the Church that
gave even Europe the idea of democracies: the Church that
periodically provides the whole world, in Papal encyclicals, with
a guidance on problems of the hour which the press reproduces in
letters of gold: the Church that gathers 350,000,000 happy and
virtuous folk, without distinction of class, color, or odor, under
its White mantle: the Church that promotes culture and exerts an
inflexible moral rule over the nations.

     That is the false front. In these 20 booklets I have taken you
behind it and shown you the real Church of Rome. Its apologists lie
outrageously about it. They lie about its political and ethical
principles, its history and its law, its numbers and its quality,
its plots and its open action. They dare not allow the press today
to let the world know the truth about the social condition and the
action of the Church in a score of countries from Bolivia to Japan.
I have proved all this.

     In my long literary career I have written books in strange
conditions -- in the smoking rooms and Marconi cabins of liners, in
crowded apartments-houses or on the sunny beach, in the bed-rooms
of hotels of all grades -- but I never before wrote, as I have
written these 300,000 words, on a battlefield. The National
Library, in which I delve for material, is charred and battered and
almost deserted and the books for which I call come to me sometimes
disfigured by fire or water or fail, and evermore fail, to come...


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               4

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

But you can guess all that. I say that in spite of all this these
twenty booklets are from beginning to end just statements of fact,
on incontestable evidence, and they prove that the Catholic Church
is, if not "the most evil thing in the world," certainly the most
treacherous and mendacious.

     It may seem that I have reserved to the last the question
which will seem to many the most important: the question what the
Church is worth to the world on a balance of services and
disservices. But I have been replying to that question all through.
Many folk say that they do not care what the Church did in the 4th
Century, or the 13th or the 16th; and there is so much blood and
dirt on the pages of medieval history that Catholics often
encourage that feeling, or they would at least like you to believe
that the services they claim -- usually by a gross perversion of
history -- to have rendered were due to a noble spirit which is
ever fresh in the Church, while those immense splotches of blood,
those vast areas of servile squalor, and those equally vast areas
of priestly and monastic corruption were just temporary and local
foulings of the garments of the Church in the mud of a wicked
world. If you fancy that that childish stuff is really not written
today dip into any Catholic book that deals with these matters.

     We might leave the past of the Church in its smelly historical
tomb if Catholic apologists would let us, but they will not. They
lie heroically about its history, and it is vital to an
understanding of the Black International that we should know that
its writer's lie habitually. In this connection their lies take the
shape of claiming that the Church rendered massive services to
civilization, and it is largely on the ground of these fictitious
services that they demand consideration today.

     Moreover, the Church boasts, and on the whole justly, that it
never changes. It is a strange boast in a world that decidedly
grows in wisdom and sheds innumerable errors as it advances, but it
does at all events justify us in judging what the Church does today
by what it did in the Middle Ages, when it was perfectly free to
carry out its principles. When modern Popes are stung into
indiscretion they use just the same language as medieval Popes did,
as we found Plus XI doing in his open letter to Cardinal Gasparri
in 1929. The Canon Law, which is kept in a dead language so that
priests alone can read it, makes the same monstrous claim of a
power over life and death as the medieval Popes made. The
bestiality which the Pope encourages in Spain and Portugal today is
the same as Popes encouraged a century ago in the whole of Southern
Europe and in all Europe during the Middle Ages.

     No, it is folly to ask us to let dead Popes bury their dead.
This work, however, is concerned with the Church today, and there
is so much to be said about it that I have to avoid history or
confine my short excursions into it within the strict needs of my
present task. So to the question whether the Church has done good
in the past and the race is indebted to it I just say bluntly that
practically every claim it makes is fictitious, as I have
exhaustively shown in earlier works, and on balance we must say
that it has retarded the advance of European civilization by many
centuries.


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               5

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

     I must say a little more than this in regard to what I call
the modern period. I believe that when scholarship and literature
are again free, when the disgraceful power over them of the Black
International is broken, historians will date the beginning of the
modern age from the outbreak of the French Revolution, The broad
ideal of a just life was then clearly formulated. The revolutionary
armies carried it, with their symbolic tricolor, as far as the
southernmost tips of Italy, Spain, and Portugal and Napoleon's,
armies bore the ensign of at least a liberal civilization to the
bounds of Europe. Naples and Madrid were for a time more advanced
than London. Latin America throbbed with a new passion.

     From that age to ours the outstanding event of history has
been the long-drawn battle for those ideals, and Rome has
throughout been on the side of our enemies. Ever since the bloody
shambles it countenanced, if it did not inspire, in Naples in 1794
the Black International has allied itself with every power, however
corrupt and brutal it was, that took the field against those who
were fighting for the elementary rights of man, for freedom and
democracy. What has happened in the last ten years is simply that
the Vatican, which had been compelled for half a century to profess
in democratic countries that it was reconciled with the new age --
in America alone the Black International has the effrontery to
claim that the Church is the actual source of modern ideals --
became convinced that it had found more powerful allies than ever
in the fight against liberalism, and the war which began in 1798
and in one country or other (especially Spain) has been almost
continuously maintained, has entered upon a new and terrible phase.

     That is the key-idea that you must keep clearly in mind if you
want to understand the relation of the Roman Church to the world-
war. It is an idea of crucial importance in estimating the world-
situation but no journalistic oracle in the United States dare say
it, while what we may call the literary and ethical oracles who,
discuss the more profound aspects of the situation will put forward
any fantastic theory, from the growth of materialism to the
diversion of the Gulf Stream, rather than risk offending Catholics
and injuring their own prestige and circulation, by telling the
plain truth. That this is the plain truth I have shown, as regard's
the last ten years, in these 20 books and for the earlier phase in
larger works, The True Story of the Roman Catholic Church and The
A peal to Reason Library.

     A third work would be of very considerable use to the modern
reader, especially in America, where, apart from the one or two
brushes with Britain, the historical development has encouraged a
real cultural isolation from Europe as fir as our present theme is
concerned. An American writer who visited me some years ago
confirmed me in my suspicion that there is no good and adequate
work available on the mighty struggle in Europe in the 19th Century
against the clerical-royalist-capitalist attempts to kill what
survived of the best ideals of the French Revolution. For that
matter there is today no work published in England, for it would
have to tell the ghastly truth about the Church, and in both
countries the Black International uses its new power, not merely to
exclude the truth from literature and education but to see that
false versions of the story of man from 1789 onward are imposed 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               6

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

everywhere. In the absence of such a work I can but reiterate that
from 1794 (in France and Italy) until its present alliance with
Fascism (in Spain and Poland, for instance) the Church has allied
itself with brutal oppressors and enemies of freedom, as I have
abundantly proved in earlier works, and sum up the evidence given
in this series of booklets in regard to the last ten years.

     It is useful to take a broad view before we look at the
situation more closely. The alleged service of the Roman Church in
promoting civilization can be very soundly tested from this broad
viewpoint. Just glance at the leading countries of the world and
note in each case what we -- the great majority of men and women in
the best-educated countries -- would assign as the grade of its
civilization and what proportion of the people the Roman Church
claims to control; and to allow for the present appalling confusion
or violent distortion of conditions we will survey the world as it
was in 1939 and regard only countries where the Roman Church is
substantially represented.

     Granting that total wealth or size is not of itself a
criterion of civilization there would be general agreement to name
these ten countries as having attained the highest rank: the United
States, Great Britain, Russia, France, Switzerland, Holland,
Denmark, Sweden, Norway, and Argentina. In none of these countries
does the Roman Church command the allegiance, of more than one-
sixth of the population except Holland. where its members and
political representatives are one-third of the whole -- still not
enough to have Influence on the general character -- and Argentina,
where, however, the constructive class is (or was until 1935)
mainly skeptical (and probably still is). Argentina is, in any
case, the one, power whose place in this list would be disputed.

     There would be general agreement to put these countries at the
lower end of the scale; Poland, Spain, Portugal, Italy, Eire,
Brazil, and most of the smaller South American Republics. In these
the Church claims the great majority of the people and certainly as
regards the constructive forces they are Catholic countries. They
are all Fascist, as none of the above ten are, but, for the moment
I am looking at what by general agreement would be called their
grade of civilization. The place of Hungary might be disputed, but
it is only little more than half Catholic and its dictator is not
a Catholic. Czecho-Slovakia as a whole was in the highest class,
but events have shown that the progressive qualities were in non-
Catholic Bohemia, and that Catholic Slovakia is at the level of
Poland. I have omitted Mexico, which on the ground of recent
accomplishment (reduction of crime and illiteracy, social
legislation, etc.) I should be disposed to put in the first class,
because its place would be warmly disputed. But one thing is not
open to dispute: whatever progress has been made in the last 20
years was due to an anti-Catholic body of statesmen and supporters.
Germany must be left out of account unless we go back to pre-Nazi
days, but even then Catholic's were a one-fourth minority and they
are In large part responsible for the triumph of Nazism and ruin of
the country. In Belgium the forces are about equal, and the grade
of civilization corresponds.

 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               7

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

     You will see the full significance of this if you recall that,
as I said, all these countries entered upon the great race, as we
may call it, of the last 150 year's with much the same equipment of
ideals. The Revolutionary and the Napoleonic armies, beating a path
for French literature, made those ideals familiar from Portugal to
Sweden, and Latin America was awakened from one end to the other by
the echoes of the struggle. Even Ireland had quite a notable body
of Deists and humanitarians (Robert Emmet, Wolfe Tone, and many
others) amongst its educated men in the last years of the 18th
Century. It has none today or not one who dare open his lips, and
the country remains, with all its political and religious pride,
poor, squalid, ignorant, and of inferior general character. in
other words, every country in which the influence of the Papacy was
paramount failed to advance in the path that was indicated by those
new ideals of civilization which we all regard as sound. But the
countries in which Rome had no such influence or where, as in
France, it lost its power, joined the predominantly Protestant
countries in advancing to the higher rank. That is the first reply,
and it is perfectly sound from the sociologleal angle, to the claim
that the Roman Church promotes civilization.


                           Chapter 11

           THE BLACK INTERNATIONAL ALWAYS IN THE REAR

     In this general survey I have repeatedly referred to the
ideals of freedom and democracy. For most of us these are partial
expressions of the modern spirit, the demand for justice, which, in
alliance with the advance of science, has lifted the ten countries
I named to the highest rank. The attempt of Catholic writers in
various countries to represent them as mere political claims, or
even as a liberalism, that the world has tried and found wanting,
are mere excuses to cover the Vatican's alliance with Fascism or
the Fascist Encyclical of the Pope Quadragesimo Anno. It must be
understood, however, that I have not assigned these 20 nations
their place in the scale of civilization on that test. If one
proposed to do this it would be simple and accurate to say that all
Catholic countries are now Fascist and all democratic countries are
non-Catholic. But it is more convincing if we apply a broader test
of civilization.

     The Catholic apologist would define the service of his Church
by saying (first and chiefly) that it defends the family, that it
trains all people whom it can influence in general moral character,
that it preaches and insists upon justice, individual and social,
and that it is zealous for education and philanthropy. And since,
he would say, the family is, according to very many if not most
sociologists, the foundation of the state, the particular zeal and
rigorous measures of his Church, which distinguish it in an age of
growing laxity, must especially recommend it to the statesman and
the social student.

     Piffle, as usual. The Roman Church has three distinctive
features in its teaching about the family. First, it insist that
its priests, monks, and nuns shall not marry and shall not have any
recognizable families; and since the implication of this is that 
sexual commerce has some sort of taint even where it is licensed

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               8

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

one does not see how we can speak here of the Church guarding this
particular foundation of the state. Secondly, it alone amongst the
Churches -- in fact, it shares this distinction only with a few
groups of the lowest savages on earth -- forbids divorce; and since
this harsh restriction of human rights has either, as in Catholic
countries, to be alleviated by the general use of mistresses or
brothels, or it amounts to a positive deterrent from marriage, we
again fail to perceive any service, and no statesman of any of the
leading civilizations has any respect for the Church's teaching on
this point. The law of divorce which now exists in every
civilization except those of lower grade that are subject to the
Pope is based upon the collective recognition of social experience
and upon a mature adjustment of the rights of the individual and
the needs of the state. The Catholic opposition to it professes to
be based upon some words of an ancient Jewish prophet of which we
have two contradictory versions in the records and which other
Christian Churches, of equal scholarship and greater sincerity,
find compatible with divorce. It is in any case really based, as I
showed, on the fierce determination of the Popes of the early
Middle Age's to get complete control of life. On such frivolous and
anti-social grounds does this particularly strident claim of the
Church to render human service rest; and our contempt deepens when
we find the Church playing fast and loose with its "indissoluble
marriage" when its own interest or profit is involved, as I showed
in my analysis of the clauses of the Canon Law and the practice of
the Papal Courts.

     Thirdly, the Black International boasts that it renders a
unique service to the state because it is the only Church or
institution that condemns, and very fiercely condemns birth
control. The Black International is as usual, out of date. For the
last ten years it has shared that distinction with the criminal
leaders of the Italian, Japanese, and German people. They wanted
soldiers and the excuse of over-population to cover their
imperialist greed. The Black International wanted more contributors
to its treasury and, as priests have admitted, to beat rival
Churches by outbreeding them. The clerical opposition to birth
control is, in fact, such an obvious piece of priestcraft and has
so little foundation even in their own weird and wonderful theology
that they confess (as I quoted), the Catholic laity in America are
to an alarming extent ignoring their sulphuric orders and
restricting their families: which makes their "social" argument
look rather anaemic.

     The apologists have recently been encouraged by the appearance
of a new school of opponents of birth control whose leaders and
statements are not religious. These professors and their learned
lady friends recognize that the old opposition was based upon a
demand for as many soldiers as possible and that the industrial and
professional markets are, in normal times and in capitalist
countries, already overcrowded. They say that the really sound
scientific plea is that the birth rate is so far falling out of
balance with the death rate that there will soon be a debilitating
preponderance of old folk over young. They do not take into account
the fact that science and common sense are steadily raising what we
may call the vitality-period of men and women. I could write
caustic pages on my own recent experience in being rejected (as one


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               9

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

in senile decay) from all departments of the British national
effort by men whose laziness, short hours, and easygoing methods
are notorious, But I have space only for one point. France has
practiced birth control for more than half a century almost as much
as America or Britain does today. But it was not old men who let
France down. It was a few Catholic old men, who were pushed into
office by these priests who are so concerned about the vitality of
civilization, Catholic adventurers like Laval and Bonnet, and
younger statesmen who were seduced by Catholic mistresses.

     In short, all this rhetoric about Catholic marriage and the
social welfare is hypocritical claptrap, and every statesman and
social student knows it. Every state finds in time its equilibrium
on grounds of experience in sex-matters. Sex-laws and restrictions
that are based upon ancient philosophic's or religions, ultimately
upon more ancient taboos and superstitions, merely distract
attention and hamper the social activity. Apologists for them have
to repeat outdated and thoroughly exposed statements about the ruin
of older civilizations by vice. Five year's ago most folk would
have said that the two most vigorous nations were the German and
the American, and both enjoyed an advanced degree of sexual
freedom. Today we should say that Russia and America are the most
vigorous nations. But according to the priests the American people
are only restrained from a monstrous parade of sex, in their books,
pictures, and theaters, by the severe paternal cheek of the clergy,
while Russia has always had a liberal divorce law and for quarter
of a century has denied that marriage is a sacrament and birth
control a sin.

     For reasons -- reasons of self-interest -- which I discussed
in an earlier book Catholic apologists have always put this sex and
marriage-business in the forefront of their statement of claims. It
more or less excises the absurd official virginity of their
priests, monks and nuns: It evokes a golden echo in the hearts of
rich widows and spinsters: and it really does mark a distinction
between the Church and "the world." In theory, that is to say. And
not only is the theory itself an antiquated ethic rehabilitated for
priestly purposes, so that those who profess to lead civilization
are far in the rear of modern thought, but in practice Catholics
are no more "moral" than other folk. I leave it to my readers'
knowledge of American life what the situation is in America, saying
only that I have a very extensive familiarity with the best
American fiction of a realist character and that I have made
extensive inquiries during the two years (at intervals) I have
spent in America. But for "Catholic countries" you may take as
typical the pleasant exaggeration which Byron wrote when he saw a
statue of the Virgin Mary in a Portuguese city: "Well do I ween the
only virgin there." He had probably made inquiries.

     Apologists obstinately insist that Irish girls are remarkably
chaste," though I have for 30 years given proof and bitter
complaints of English Catholics (including leading priests) that
the Irish girls are sent to Britain to drop their burdens and keep
down the record of illegitimate births in Eire. A New York attorney
writes me, or wrote me 30 years ago when I took up the question,
that the same complaint was made in the New England States. Sanger
says in his History of Prostitution (1919 edition) that on personal


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               10

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

interrogation of 2,000 New York prostitutes he found that 977 (706
of whom had been born in Ireland) had had Catholic parents, and had
been brought up as Catholics. The Catholic Times (May 31, 1924)
quoted Canon Hughes, one of the highest Catholic authorities,
saying that 60 percent of the prostitutes of Liverpool -- one of
the most Catholic and most vicious cities in England -- were Irish
and only 30 percent English. Ten years later another Catholic
expert, Mrs. Ellison, stated in a book that the situation is the
same in the cities of London, Glasgow, and Newcastle (big centers
of Irish immigration). A leaflet on the subject issued by the
Protestant Truth Society (British) gives a mass of Catholic
testimony and replies to the charge that illegitimacy is 3.4
percent in Protestant Ulster and (for the above reasons) only 0.7
in Catholic Connaught that it was at the time 9.30 in Belgium,
14.89 in Austria, 15.67 in Bavaria, and 50.00 in Guatemala. Since
emigration was checked the Irish have not boasted so much. I quoted
an editorial in the Irish Times (June 12, 1937) describing a
disgraceful official record of sex-crimes in County Clare which is
in Connaught!

     This chastity-talk is not only outdated from the ethical and
sociological angle but it supported by a remarkable variety of
untruths. And if it is suggested that the real service of the
Church lies in promoting morals or character in the broader sense
the reply to just as devastating. This plea is just a relic of the
old and purely rhetorical assertion that a religious basis is
required for sound conduct. The sufficient reply is that, I have
repeatedly shown, the general level of character in the leading
civilizations has risen in the same proportion as Church influence
has decayed. For the moment we are not concerned about cause and
effect. The fact is enough. As my friend Mr. E.S.P. Haynes, a
distinguished London attorney, has written -- and he is approvingly
quoted by Julian Huxley in his Religion Without Revelation (P. 52):
"If morality did really depend on other worldly sanctions, the
religious changes of the last fifty years would by now have
dissolved society at large." What has happened is much the same as
with the old superstition that it is unlucky to pass under a
ladder. People now see that a good reason for not doing it is that
the man who does not keep clear of a ladder raised against a
building is apt to get drips of paint or bricks dropped on him. In
the same way they discover that sound moral law is a sanitation-
regulation of the social life.

     The irony of paying attention to the Romanist version of the
old apologetic, which is the noisiest of them all, is that the
Papal Church promotes sound character even less than the other
Christian Churches. Middle-class folk, to which class most writers
belong, argue on these matters in the most slovenly fashion. Their
acquaintance with Catholics is confined to their class, and in this
they meet many Catholic men and women of admirable character. So,
they lazily conclude, Catholicism molds character. Middle-class men
who are not puritans have insisted to me -- two of them were
attorneys -- that they find Catholic girls easier to persuade or
less in need of persuasion than other girls. But let us remember,
the nature of the Church as I analyzed it. Of the 100,000,000 or so
adult subjects of the Pope at least 80,000,000 have not the least 



                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               11

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

resemblance to the middle-class American or British Catholic. Half
of them are imperfectly civilized Latin Americans (with Cuba and
the Philippines) and most of the remainder are illiterate or poor
and ignorant Spaniards, Italians, Portuguese, Slovaks, etc.

     The general level of character in a nation is an elusive
factor but it is fairly determined, if we make allowances for
police-conditions, by the volume of crime. Criminal behavior in the
extreme form of unsocial conduct, and the number of criminals is a
good indication of the amount of unsocial conduct generally. If,
therefore, we find, as we do, that Catholic countries are more
criminal than non-Catholic, and that as a mixed country a quite
disproportionate number of the criminals are Catholics, we must
conclude that the Church is no more effective in inspiring sound
social behavior than in securing the chastity about which it talks
so much.

     I have given a few statistics in book No. 13. As Catholics are
apt to contest this I may add a few more. In No. 23 of his
Questions and Answer (p. 87) Haldeman-Julius gives, from a book by
a Catholic prison chaplain (Fr. Leo Kalmer, Crime and Religion) a
most damning series of figures. The priest ascertained from his
colleagues the percentage of Catholics in 36 American
penitentiaries and the result extends to the whole of America the
truth disclosed in the figure's I gave for Sing Sing (48.50 percent
in Joliet, 46.92 in San Quentin, 57.31 in Auburn, 63.64 in
Wethersfield, etc.). Analysis by the Rev. L.B. Lehmann brings out
the fact that in 28 states, in which Catholics are 17 percent of
the population, they are 33 percent of the criminals. The whole
article in Haldeman-Julius' book should be read.

     The only other mixed states for which exact comparative
figures are available are the Commonwealth of Australia and the
Dominion of New Zealand. In the case of Australia the figures are
particularly interesting because the Roman Church has as much power
there as in America and is just as blatant in its claims. It is 36
years since I first reproduced the full figures relating to crime
and Catholicism in that country, and I have brought them up to date
every few years. They are as damning as those of America, yet
Catholics continue to claim in the most brazen manner that they
guard the foundations of the state by promoting character.

     The Queensland State Schools Defense Fund issued a leaflet
quoting the figures from the official publications. This showed
that in Victoria in 1936 the Catholic prisoners numbered 2,164,
whereas since the Catholics are only 18 percent of the population,
their ought to have been only 754 Catholic prisoners if their moral
quality was equal to that of non-Catholics. In New South Wales they
had 454 prisoners instead of the 145 to which their percentage of
the population entitled them. In Queensland the disproportion was
the same. In the Commonwealth Catholics, mostly Irish, had three
times the number of criminals they ought to have had if they were
as good as and no better than their neighbors. As Catholics in
Queensland had just published a new demand for the preferential
treatment of their schools, the Protestants retorted humorously
that they ought themselves to receive preferential treatment in the
matter of taxation because they maintain extra police and jails to
look after Catholic criminals.

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               12

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

     In 1937 Archbishop Mannix, the bitter muddle-headed Irishman
who in his very Christian hatred of England used all the influence
of the Church to induce Australian's to confine themselves to their
pleasures and dollar-making while Britain fought and suffered for
ideals -- until the hideous face of the Japs appeared on the
horizon and Australia cried frantically to America and Britain for
help -- made one of his usual attacks on the public schools of
Australia. They were demoralizing even Catholic boys. He said this
in Melbourne (Victoria). Shortly afterward's the Report of the
Victorian Children's Courts for 1937 was published. Of 973 child
delinquents it appeared that 582, or 37.4 percent were Roman
Catholics; and Catholics are only 18 percent of the population of
Melbourne.

     That is typical of the value, of these loudly-shouted claims
of Catholic apologists. They know that none of the papers will test
the claims by statistical or historical facts, and that letters to
the press which do this will be suppressed as "offensive to
Catholics." The Protestant Watchman of New South Wales in 1941.
published, an analysis of the space given in the four daily papers
of Sydney to Catholic and Protestant affair's respectively. In a
period of three months the Roman Catholics got 491 inches, the
Church of England 280 (if we count out a large photo with the queen
in it), and the Methodists and Presbyterians 186. Is Sydney a
Catholic city? Far from it. The Roman Church controls only 17
percent of the population: the Church of England 40 percent: the
Methodist and Presbyterians 14 percent. But the arms of the Black
Octopus are everywhere, strangling freedom and truth, from the
office of the cabinet minister or the trade union to the editorial
office and the public libraries.

     Most countries do not now publish the figures of the religious
professions of criminals, and full figures of crime in Catholic and
non-Catholic countries are not so easily obtained as one would
suppose. Few sociologists or criminologists omit to mention the
Church, and prominently, amongst the agencies which make for social
sanity and stability, but, though it will be understood that my
acquaintance with such literature is not complete, I do not know
one of them who dares to follow this up by examining the statistics
of crime and the profession's of criminals or the religious status
of the various countries.

     The article "Homicide" in the Encyclopedia of the Social
Sciences has a little merit in this connection. It quotes Ferri's
table showing the reduction of it in recent times in five of the
leading European countries by giving the percentage per 100,000 of
the population:

          Germany   1.0 in 1865-85  and  0.6 in 1906-10
          France    2.4 in 1827-31  and  1.4 in 1911-15
          England   8.1 in 1856-60  and  0.7 in 1906-10
          Spain     9.4 in 1881-85  and  5.2 in 1911-15
          Italy     12.2 in 1871-75 and  4.1 in 1911-15

     Italy, remember, was despotically ruled by the Papacy until
1870 and had an appalling record of crime to reduce. I may add that
crime doubled in a few years after the Fascists usurped power in it


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               13

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

and was not reduced when the Vatican made its corrupt bargain to
share the control. Spain and Italy were both predominantly Catholic
in the last century when they had such a high record of the gravest
crime, and the modern sociologist scorns the excuse of "the hot
blood of the south." I question the figure for Germany, as there
was no "Germany" only a number of separate states -- until 1871.
Bodis (in Mulhall's Dictionary of Statistics) gives this percentage
of trials for murder in 1876-84: United Kingdom 12, Germany 14,
France (still mainly Catholic) 23, Spain 105, Hungary 107, Italy
134. Add these to the figures I gave in No. 13, and you get such a
reply to the claim that Romanism promotes a high standard of
character that you wonder that any apologist has the effrontery to
make it.

     But all Catholics make it, and very emphatically, because it
is the only excuse they can provide for the politicians,
professors, and writers whom, in one way or other, they get to
praise the Church and denounce critics. If this claim is so
decisively disproved by the only exact test we can apply -- the
volume of crime in Catholic lands and the proportion of criminals
in mixed lands -- so decisively that no sociologist in America
thinks it prudent to discuss the matter, where must we look for
even a plausible bit of color for it? The language of Papal
encyclicals and the gorgeous comments of apologists on them suggest
that there might be more sincerity in the claim that the Church is
more effective in inspiring social justice. We will defer the
examination of this to the next chapter, but the reader will be
prepared to smile. Social justice in Italy, Vichy France, Spain,
Portugal, and Brazil as compared with America, Britain, Russia,
Denmark, Sweden, or Switzerland! It sounds like a bad joke.

     But what other test can we apply? Is the great 'service of the
Church that it provided, or moved the authorities to provide, free
education for the children of the workers? See the table of
steatitic of illiteracy which I gave in No. 13 (p. 21). They are
more damning than the statistics of crime or illegitimacy. Our
search for these massive social services of the Church begins to
remind us of that naughty definition of metaphysics -- looking in
a dark room for a black cat that isn't there. Let us, in order to
be quite just to our Catholic fellow-citizens, approach the subject
in a different way.


                           Chapter III

              THE WICKED WORLD EDUCATES THE CHURCH

     This ghastly war and the Fascist-Catholic conspiracy that led
to it interrupted an unsteady and unequal but very real and
Substantial advance of civilization in Europe and America. If my
readers are not tired of my giving proof of that, I am. I have
routed the Lippmanns and Spenglers who Strangely persuaded so many
to doubt it. I have riddled the sophistry of the novelty-monger and
pseudo-idealists who ranted that in our race to get ahead we had
created a monster of the Frankenstein order or had let the
cultivation of our intelligence outrun our cultivation of
character. The revelation of the share of "our two historic 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               14

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

religions" in drenching the planet with mud and blood ought to make
these prophets of the spiritual feel small, but I notice in the
American press that they are as cocky as ever, and our Joads in
Britain orate at Empire Pageants. These people have nearly a
monopoly of the after-the-war planning which absorbs all our finer
spirits just now. They would return to just that distracting
activity of theirs under cover of which Japs and Germans shifted
the attention of the world from the real evils that menaced it.

     The world was making a very creditable progress on most lines
of a real advance of civilization, though it was checked by the
interests of wealth and religion, until the privileged folk and
their politicians were duped into thinking that the Black and Tang
(or yellows) were merely accumulating power in order to annihilate
the Reds. This progress became appreciable about 1870, when the
United States settled down after the Civil War and Europe
triumphed, in most countries, over the vicious clerical-royalist
reaction that had followed the fall of Napoleon. Briefly, the
period characterized not merely by an advance of from 1870 to 1914
was characterized, not merely by an advance of applied science
which more than doubled the wealth-reducing capacity of a nation
but by the employment of a very large part of the new wealth to
create systems of universal free education, an immense
multiplication of free libraries, the establishment in most
countries of fully democratic political regimes and the
enfranchisement of women, factory-legislation, schemes of old-age
pensions and health and unemployment insurance, sanitation, re-
housing, and other measures which doubled the average expectation
of life, a considerable growth of temperance (or temperateness),
and great reduction of crime, the doubling (generally) of real
wages, the enormous improvement of hospitals and services for the
distressed, and the spread of an anti-war sentiment.

     Some say that that is a materialistic conception of progress.
Most men and women in 1914 would have said that they did not care
a damn what you called it but that -- if they read a candid account
of life before 1870 -- the world, in spite of its lingering
defects, was a very much better place to live in. But let me again,
in passing, point out the humbug of this "spirit" and "matter"
business.

     I have just been reading, dreary as the occupation was, one of
those numerous recent works on the beauty of modern high-brow
Buddhism and how it will save the world. Out of the mush of
Verbiage I picked the general statement that the Supreme aim of
Buddhism is "the extinction of suffering." Funny. That is exactly
the supreme aim of atheists and materialists. I pointed out years
ago that progress is not to be judged by some misty goal in the
clouds but by the success of a nation in reducing suffering. And
while a certain number of people in every generation can be
persuaded to lessen the risk of suffering for themselves by
despising the wicked world and its wine, women, and song, and
retiring to a semi-nudist colony to contemplate their navels --
which seems to be Buddhism -- it seems to us atheists and
materialists far better to remove or reduce as much as possible the
sources of suffering (disease, poverty, war, ignorance, etc.) for
millions of people.


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               15

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

     Talking of our navel-contemplators, I fancy you will find a
little irrelevance well worth inserting here. I do not know whether
you ever came across a priceless book published nine years ago by
Professor T. O'Conroy. It ought to have been reprinted in 1938 and
scattered by the million over America, at the time, when the Japs
were spending millions a year in lying propaganda. O'Conroy lived
in Japan, teaching in one of the leading universities, for 15
years. He married an aristocratic Japanese lady and was more
intimately admitted to Japanese life than any other white man. And
in 1933 he wrote this scalding indictment of the nation, showing
that for corruption, cruelty, and unscrupulousness the Japs could
not be beaten. Buddhism, he shows, fully shared this corruption,
though it was at that time -- the government had not yet invited it
to prostitute itself to the national greed -- a fat, indolent, and
useless body. But what I want to quote is an illustration of its
corruption which he gives (pp. 87-8) and which, sensational as it
is, like the similar revelation in German monasteries, I have not
seen reproduced or referred to since in American literature or
journalism.

     A few mile's from Tokyo was a large and rich monastery of what
was understood to be the very strictest sect of Buddhist monks.
They were so holy that they closed their doors against the wicked
world and wanted to be alone. But in their extensive grounds there
was a home for feeble-minded women, tended by the good monks, and
a rumor spread in Tokyo that numbers of these unfortunates were
just unwanted wives whose husbands paid the monks to take them
over. A Tokyo paper organized a raid in 1928, and though the police
at once suppressed it, published an amazing story. The Buddhist
monastery was a colony of sadists, just as the German Franciscan
friars were found to be colonies of sodomists. When the raiders
burst in they found the monk-keepers gambling and squabbling with
blood-splotched paper money, while the women, half mad or half
dead, lay about, mutilated, exhausted, fouled with the monks'
excrements. Women were chained even in the temple, and rape, sexual
mutilation, and ignominy were but a few of the foul performances
that took place." And this is the second greatest "spiritual"
religion of our time: the religion over which our idealists and
scorners of materialism go into ecstasies!

     Like the monasteries in the Catholic provinces of Germany and
the more Catholic republics of South and Central America and the
Philippines, these Buddhist monasteries -- O'Conroy says that
decent Buddhist priests told him that 60 to 80 percent of their
body were corrupt -- illustrate what is always likely to happen in
medieval conditions; that is to say, wherever the monastery is
surrounded by a drowsy or drugged population of believers free from
the taint of heresy. It was the normal condition of Catholic
monasteries throughout the Middle Ages, and it lingered, as in
Germany, Italy, Spain, Portugal, Spanish America, and the
Philippines, wherever this parasitic Catholic atmosphere lingered.
This is the first broad proof that the Church was taught sense and
virtue by what it calls the wicked world or the materialistic age.

     An examination of the progress and the causes of social reform
in each country would clinch this proof, but obviously a
satisfactory treatment of that subject would require a large 
volume; and, as it is one of those inquiries that the Church does

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               16

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

not like, no historian or sociologist has taken it up and there is
no work to recommend to the reader. I have, as some readers will
know, not only given a large amount of material for the study in
previous works but have written one in which enough of the evidence
is condensed to satisfy any candid inquirer (How Freethinkers Made
Notable Contributions to Civilization, Haldeman-Julius Co. 1938).
In this work I examined the record of progress, particularly during
the last 100 years, in respect of the struggle for freedom,
education, social and political rights, the emancipation of woman,
philanthropy, and general improvement, and I showed that, while in
those days religious folk, though by no means so lenient to
Catholics as they now are, at least thought them an immeasurably
larger and more respectable body than freethinkers, yet fully one
half the pioneers in all reforms were freethinker's and none were
Catholics.

     You wonder what Catholic apologists, loudly claiming that the
Church leads in progress and civilization, say to that. The answer
is: Nothing, as far as I can discover. I have several times quoted
a very popular apologetic work, published under the patronage of
heads and professors of several American universities, entitled The
Calvert Handbook of Catholic Facts. It ought to say "of Catholic
Rhetoric" or "Catholic Lies." It makes the usual generalized claims
but, as the Church must have exerted this mighty influence on
progress and civilization through definite individuals, the leaders
of chief workers in reform-movements, I look for the names of these
-- and find none. There is a lot about Catholic relatives of
Presidents, rich Catholic men of business, Catholic diplomatists,
Catholic judges, and so on, but for every Catholic named as a
worker in reform-movements I will undertake to name a hundred
skeptics.

     There is in the book an article on Catholics who contributed
to American civilization in particular or civilization in general.
It names Sobieski, whose monument is Poland, Ferdinand and
Isabella, whose monument is Spain, and the discoveries of America,
who would have gone to the stake if they had not professed
Romanism. That covers the later Middle Ages. Then we have a Father
White, who is said to have set up the first printing press (from
England) in America, another who was great at shorthand in its
infancy, another who invented a balloon; and another who (getting
the idea from England) built the first railroad in America. Two or
three are credited with naval and military distinction, and there
is the usual bunch of great Catholic scientists (Pasteur, Fabre,
etc.) most of whom were skeptics. There are the men who wrote
"Maryland" and "The Conquered Banner," the architect of the White
House, the man who sold the estate for it, and the man who planned
the city of Washington (a "majestic plan"). There you have the
sweepings of three centuries, from Europe as well as America. They
do not represent a small body of Quakers or still smaller body (at
that time) of freethinkers but the biggest religion in the world.

     Did anybody ever say that no Catholic ever won any sort of
distinction, even in shorthand, ballooning, or writing songs? We
are familiar with Catholics writing any sort of tripe for their own
hypnotized people, but this sort of thing is written for non-
Catholic Americans and has the patronage of Nicholas Murray Butler 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               17

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

and the President of the Carnegie Institute of Technology. The
great work for civilization was achieved from 1870 onward. How many
of these illustrious Catholics fall in that period? Only the
balloonist as far as I can see. We may admit that gas and hot air
are entitled to clerical respect, but what the Catholic apologist,
claims is the inspiration of our progress in education, the
reduction of social service. How many of crime, and poverty, and
suffering these brilliant men figure in those fields? Not one.

     Let us try another way. As the Jesuits are supposed to have
inspired Jefferson and Adams, who loathed Jesuits and their creed
as much as Haldeman-Julius does, perhaps it will be claimed that it
was the subtly compelling influence of Papal encyclicals that
permeated the world and somehow fired large bodies of men and women
(mostly skeptics) to devote their lives to ridding the world of its
medieval evils and miseries. This would be very singular when we
reflect that of those who are supposed to be the closest readers of
the encyclopedias, the priests, not one -- unless you want me to
count Father Coughlin -- figures in the long list of reform-
leaders, and not one Catholic layman is found in any list of, say,
the hundred leading social workers of the 19th Century. The
influence of religion on leader's of reform is one of those studies
which our sociologists carefully avoid, though most of them give
religion a high-place in the list of inspirational agencies, but I
have made the research elsewhere, and the grotesque scratchings in
the byways of history of the Calvert Handbook confirm me. The Papal
encyclicals moved the world to great deeds and through atheists and
Quakers! Really, apologists ought not to advertise so blatantly
what they think of Catholic intelligence.

     But what are these grand encyclicals (or "to the whole world")
letters of the Popes on social matters. Even a Catholic would beg
me not to go too far back, so let us begin about the beginning of
the modern progressive period. Pius IX (of "Blessed Memory," the
Catholic writer always adds, though Italians who knew him have
written some funny things about him) opened the series in 1864 with
the encyclical Quanta cura and the Syllabus. Your apologists now
never mention it. He, having still at that time the reactionary
French emperor to protect him against the wicked Italians, scorched
the whole reform-movement with the choicest Papal invectives. He
put "liberalism," which we now call pink tea, on a level with
Satanism, which is several notches lower than rape.

     Then came the great encyclical-writer Leo XIII. He was as fond
of writing encyclicals as Churchill is of writing speeches. Two of
them are still gorgeously praised -- and falsely interpreted -- In
American Catholic literature. But just keep your eye on the dates
and the historical background. Leo won the tiara in 1878, when the
reform-movement was full on in Europe. America he knew only as a
raw outpost of civilization -- I suspect he knew it mostly from
Dickens's Letters and Martin Chuzzlewit -- and he had many a brush
with its bishops, but he did follow social and political movements
in Europe. Yet it was not until thirteen years after his accession
that he issued the first encyclical which the most ingenious
apologist can call socially inspiring. He had not been silent. In
1878 he had issued an encyclical cursing Socialism root and branch.
Next year he had imposed the medieval "philosophy of Aquinas on the


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               18

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

Catholic world. In the following year he had thundered at the
world, which was reforming its marriage-laws, that divorce was a
mortal sin (except in the ingenious form in which rich Catholics
can get it from Rome). In 1881 he pointed out, apropos of the
assassination of the Tsar, that these appalling outrages were due
to the decay of religion (not, of course, to the bestiality of the
Tsarist regime), and in 1884 he put Freemasonry Under the ban. In
1885 he issued the Immortale Dei, which Ryan still applauds as a
fine democratic appeal; and I have shown that it is nothing of the
kind. In 1888 he savagely attacked the claim of religious freedom
and liberty of discussion. It was not until 1891, when he saw
Socialism gaining ground rapidly at the expense of the Church, that
he issued the one encyclical, Rerum novarum, which Catholics claim
to give a lead in social reform; and the only "revolutionary"
sentence in it was the statement that the workers must have a
living wage. (which he refused to define), which had been a
platitude of liberal literature for half a century. And in his last
beautiful messages to the world he retracted this and died
sputtering the most reactionary sentiments.

     I pass on the next two Popes. Ryan does not quote them. They
were stuffy and ill-informed reactionaries all their lives. And in
1931 the late Pope, or the present Pope writing in his name issue
the Fascist encyclical Quadragesimo anno which the British and
American hierarchies dare not translate into English! It opened the
blatantly Fascist, conspiratorial, warmongering career of his
"holiness" Pius XII.

     Need I point the moral? The Papacy was throughout the whole
period the enemy of progress of the rights of the people. It was
just compelled for a time to temporize because it looked even to
these owlish Italians priests as if democracy had won its war and
the world was adopting the liberalism in social matters which the
Popes scorned. Yet even when concessions had to be made to check
the leakage of millions of workers from the Church they took only
the feeble form of saying that if the French people really insisted
on having a republic they might, provided it kept the Catholic
Church established by law and that capitalists must grant their
workers a "just wage," which it was left to them to determine.

     What do I mean then, you will ask, by saying that the wicked
world educated the Church? The Popes apparently, never were
educated in sound views of social ethics. What I mean is that in
America, Britain, France, Germany, and Italy a social-democratic
movement (without the capital letters) spread in the Catholic world
after 1900. Quite bold books appeared, and there were "social
experts" and all sorts of novelties. What was the inspiration?
Evidently it did not come from the Papacy. Had local hierarchies
and their Ryans and Williams a finer appreciation of the
implications of the faith than the Holy-Ghost-inspired Pope's and
all the great theological geniuses of the Middle Ages?

     Enough of this nonsense. The plain truth is that after leaving
it to non-Catholics for a century, when the work was heart-breaking
and the penalty often death or jail, to break the paths of social
and humanitarian reform, the local Black International in some
countries concluded that in the interest of the Church they must 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               19

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

join in the work. It was a death-bed repentance. But the patient
recovered. That is to say, the Black International, which for a
time had despaired of life on the old lines of privilege and
autocracy, saw a new hope in the rise of Fascism and became
convinced that it was going to conquer the world. So the death-bed
confession of sin was torn up in Rome and in all countries that
passed under the pirate-flag, and it is only in one or two
countries like America and Britain, where democracy may survive and
may even regain the world, where in any case Catholics are a
minority and must behave like the Japanese in California or Oregon,
that one still hears how freedom and democracy are grand old
Catholic ideas conveyed to a wicked and despairing world by the
august, and fearless, and un-compromising encyclicals of the Popes.


                           Chapter  IV

        THE CONTRAST OF RUSSIA AND PRIEST-RULED COUNTRIES

     While the services rendered by the Church to civilization are
as hard to find as the black cat in a dark room, the services it
rendered to the repulsive forces which have attempted to wreck
civilization are as plain as the peaks of the Rockies. The
alliances contracted by the Vatican with Italy, Japan, and Germany
are events of recent history like the New Deal or the Atlantic
Charter. The dates and terms of the agreements are public property.
But one service requires special consideration: the organization of
the entire resources of the Church to engender hatred of Communism
in general and of Russia in particular.

     This service began, explicitly as far as the documents I have
seen tell us, in 1936, though the Vatican had begun its furious
attack upon Communism and even, in effect, its appeal for a crusade
against it, much earlier. From 1919 to 1924 the Pope was, we saw,
straining, every nerve to get on friendly terms with Soviet Russia
so as to bring under his control the Orthodox Church when its
leaders were scattered. The Russians repeatedly detected the
Catholic clergy in treachery and in 1924 closed the country against
missionaries from Rome. So in December of that year Pius XI, who
had hitherto in great charity kept in check his hatred of
Communism, attacked it in his Consistorial Allocution (December 18)
and called the attention of all "heads of "governments" to the
danger of it. He, in fact, coupled Socialism with Communism as
equally dangerous. In 1931 he, we saw, ordered all Catholic states
(in encyclical Quadragesimo anno) to adopt the Fascist state and
sternly forbade Catholics to take up either Socialism or Communism.
He said that Communism had brought "massacres and ruin upon Eastern
Europe." This attack on Russia seems to have been taken up or
fostered by his representatives everywhere, as on December 30,
1932, the British Daily Worker said that "the clergy of all creeds
and denominations are, with religion as their pretext following the
lead of the Pope in his call for a crusade against the U.S.S.R."

     The direct and more pointed attack began, however, in 1936,
shortly after the outbreak of Franco's rebellion in Spain. We must
remember that Italy and Germany were not at that time open allies
of Franco, and America and Britain had not declared their attitude 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               20

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

to what everybody still called a rebellion. But there was no
reserve at Rome. In a blistering and most untruthful attack on
Communism, which he represented as the aggressor in Spain, the Pope
spoke of it as a force that was attempting to subvert established
order of every kind from Russia to China, from Mexico to South
America." From this year onward he appealed repeatedly for "the
extinction" of Bolshevism in Spain, Mexico, and Russia, and, as we
saw, "he holy cry for blood was taken up in the Catholic section of
every country.

     When the Czecho-Slovakian crisis, which might be called the
first stage of the world-war, arose in 1938 the service that the
Vatican and its Black International in every country had already
rendered the imperialist thugs by this propaganda was apparent.
Joint action at once by Britain, France, and Russia would have
strangled Hitlerism in its cradle and put a cheek to the ambitions
of Japan. But Britain was under obligation only to support France,
and France was persuaded by its Catholic politicians and military
leaders, the present Vichy crowd, that Russia could not be trusted
to keep its word: in reality, that active partnership with so
disreputable a power and helping it to cheek the strength of
Germany must not be undertaken by France. As late as 1940 British
generals of the stuffy Tory type were saying: "We may have to ally
our selves with Russia, but God forgive us." That contemptuous
attitude the Black International fed in every country for ten
years, to the very great profit of the bandits.

     We admit the double root of this hatred of Russia, or the
capitalist and the Catholic roots, but we have to recognize this
difference: that the capitalists, who make no pretence of moral
principle, are honest opponents of a dangerous rival system,
whereas the priests, who profess to be the moral saviors of a
wicked world lie about their motives and by their action run the
risk of bringing upon civilization precisely that ruin which they
untruthfully accused the Communists of contemplating. The Pope's
outburst in 1936 which I quoted in an earlier book and which was
clearly written by the present Pope as Secretary of State, was a
tissue of untruthful charges. Instead of trying to "subvert
established order of every kind" by "an un-parallel confusion of
forces so savage and cruel as to have been thought utterly
incompatible" -- whatever the last phrase may mean -- Russia had by
1936, as the whole world knew, wrought a miracle of the creation of
order out of chaos. In 1923, as a result of the European War, the
Civil War, and the great famine, Russia had been reduced to a
condition of disorder and misery which had not been seen in Europe
since the end of the Thirty Years War (1648). The restoration began
in earnest a few years later, and by 1936 the most respected writer
of Britain and America reported, with a few reserves, that the
Soviet government had, especially in regard to the reduction of
crime and the establishment of social order, won a remarkable
victory.

     Apologists in America had generally, to be less wild than the
Pope in their indictment of Russia, but they were reckless enough.
The old lies about the massacre of priests and the persecution of
religion flourished in Catholic literature from year to year; in
fact, there is good ground to believe that the official 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               21

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

representatives of America demanded assurances on the latter point
when they began to negotiate with Russia about military aid. The
conspiracies in which some of the leading Bolsheviks were involved
were eagerly snapped up as proof that the country was ruled by a
murderous bureaucracy, whereas we now have the weighty assurance of
Duranty (with a reserve in one case) and Ambassador Davies that the
men were certainly guilty. Davies himself repeats a perennial libel
in saying that the Russians are lamentably inefficient as compared
with the Americans and the British. He has had the cruel experience
of seeing his book appear, with this reproach, just at the time
when the world had proof before it daily of the relative efficiency
of the British and the Russian military machine.

     There are two plain reasons for the sacred fury of the Church
against Russia, and the first is entirely discreditable. It is
because the attack upon Russia brought the Black International into
line with wealth and privilege in accordance with its old and
unwavering tradition. For an attack upon the Communist political
system the Church has no ground whatever since it declares that it
never interferes in politics. And when it plans its attack on
economic ground's it recognizes that it can make no distinction
between Communism and Socialism, since the degree of socialization
is not a matter of moral principle. But its claim that any moral
principle at all is involved is ludicrous. Ryan is very eloquent on
the moral right of private ownership: he is, in fact so sure of it
that he says a Socialist government would be a violation of moral
law, and Catholic Americans would be justified in rebelling against
it. Piffle. A people has a right to choose its economic form just
as well as its political regime. The apologists who talk like this
are simply saying to the world's capitalists: The Church of Rome is
your friend so help to protect it from further decay.

     The second and stronger reason is the tremendous loss which
the spread of Communism had inflicted upon the Roman Church. I gave
the facts in the first book. The press and most writers conceal
them and leave the fierce hostility of Rome to Russia not very
intelligible and cover up the vast amount of harm that the Vatican
did by spreading it's hatred over the world, yet Rome itself is
much more ready to admit this motive than to talk about its support
of the capitalist system. It, of course, does not speak of losses.
With its usual complete indifference to truthfulness it invites the
world to unite against Russia because it "attacks religion." All
criticism of the Catholic Church or telling the people the truth
about its history and its aims is "an attack" but criticism by the
Church of other Churches or philosophies is, however acrid and
untruthful it may be, just a kindly warning to the world of the
dangers that surround it.

     We may readily admit that for many years the Soviet government
gave every assistance to the voluntary organization that opened the
eyes of the people, but this official cooperation had ceased at the
time when the Vatican was shrieking about attacks on religion, and
in the other countries (Italy, France, Germany, Spain, and Spanish
America, etc.) in which the advance of Socialism and Communism
detached tens of million# from the Roman Church there was certainly
no official encouragement of the movement. The mechanism of
propaganda was a substitution of facts for lies, of knowledge for 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               22

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

ignorance. The policy of the Church when the Fascist reaction began
in each country sufficiently proves this. It closed the schools,
suppressed freedom of discussion, and strangled literature; and it
filled the jails with the men and women who had been most prominent
in exposing the clergy, and it had, and continues to have,
thousands of them labelled Communists and shot.

     We talk about the blindness of men in the red haze of war, but
the third year of this most terrible of all war's has been, to the
intense mortification of the Black International, a year of
illumination. Self-interest has, of course, helped the British and
Americans to surmount the prejudices that have been pumped into
them by press, pulpit, literature, and the cinema for 20 years, but
it will hardly be questioned that the magnificent conduct of the
Russian people has been the main fact that opened the eyes of folk
to their great qualities and the soundness of their system. Right
until the hordes of Nazi tanks, set free by the absence of any
opposition on the western front, were within a few hours run of
Leningrad and Moscow, Britons and Americans were whispering that of
course the Russian people would not fight with real devotion and
the requisite energy for a government that usurped power, treated
them despotically and mercilessly, and robbed them of their
previous religion. Novels, the class-books of so many millions,
still circulated in which the Commissars and leading officials were
represented as sadistic monsters who lived on champagne, caviar,
and Christian virgins.

     History has rarely seen such a revulsion of sentiment, such a
triumph over two decades of priestly and aristocratic slander, as
has happened in the last six months. Conservative leaders now speak
in public about "our noble Russian ally," and deputies from Russia,
who only six months ago were admitted at the back doors, so to
speak, are received with royal hands. And it is only in the last
few months that the press or most of it -- many papers still crab
at Russia and frown on the popular enthusiasm -- has supported the
change of heart. In England most of the cinemas still treat Russia
as a power which it would be indecent to obtrude upon the notice of
a Christian people. Bands at Anglo-Russian functions are forbidden
to play the Communist national anthem, and rich if small
organizations continue to publish the old libels. But, the facts
have for the vast majority of people swept away the long-standing
prejudices as the first warm rains of spring wash away the snows.

     The next step will be for the public to reflect how it has
been systematically duped over a long series of years. The share of
the Black International in this has been so conducted that most
people are unaware of it, but the truth slowly emerges and Rome
shudders. The Pope, we saw, already puts out rumors that in his
intimate circle he, from the first, drew a sharp distinction
between what he blamed in Russia, which was virtuous on the wrong
grounds, and what he blamed in Germany and Italy. But no one has
read a line in which he gave a straight moral condemnation of the
Fascists and the Nazis -- he never blamed more than their
interference with the Church and the attempt to annihilate Catholic
Poland -- whereas the Catholic authorities themselves translated
and circularized the vicious, vitriolic speech on the Communists of
Spain, Mexico, and Russia, which he delivered on September 14, 
1936, (The Spanish Terror).

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               23

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

     Into whatever contortion the Black International is driven in
the next few years the world is confronted today by a situation
which sets in a glorious light all that the Pope cursed and casts
a shade of ignominy and cowardice upon all that he blessed. Russia
shines, and even China wins honor and admiration: the two chief
countries in which the Pope had seen the activity of the devil:
Spain, the Land which his shining Catholic crusaders were going to
deliver from bondage and misery, is a country of spectral forms and
general mourning, a land in which innocent men face the firing-
squad daily, while the priests wax fatter, and the Catholic
"nobles" and politicians do actually carouse in Madrid as the
Bolshevik leaders were represented by the Pope's agents as doing in
Moscow.

     Portugal, we saw on the authority of a writer whom American
Catholics had imprudently recommended as veracious, is a country in
which priest-ridden jailers use the vilest tortures that were used
in the ages of faith: in which decades of Liberal work for the
education and elevation of the people have been trodden under foot,
and the dictators are richly rewarded by Rome because they declare
that they are ruling Portugal on the lines of the Pope's beautiful
(but untranslated) encyclical.

     Italy, dragged at the heels of Hitler's bumping chariot, is in
so pitiful a condition that it wins the sympathy of its democratic
enemies. From his own Vatican windows the Pope looks out upon a
people that in a very high proportion curses the man whom the
Vatican, by a sordid bargain, confirmed in his usurped power.
London, the bombed and ravaged city, is gay with confidence, well
fed, richly entertained at nights, reflecting the summer sun on the
faces of its citizens. Rome is beggared and dejected, despised and
bullied by the men who invited it to share the conquest of the
world.

     Vichy France is sullen and simmering. The myth that it was
somehow ruled against its will by a posse of Jews, Atheists, and
Freemasons and would, under such men of piety as Laval and Petain,
flock cheerfully to the churches, is exploded. From Normandy to
Savoy people sigh for deliverance from the regime of Catholicism
and dishonor, rusticity and penury, which has been forced upon
them. The French people have provided most of the $10,000,000,000
worth of loot that the blond beasts, whom the Black International
persuaded the French to admit, have dragged in French cars on
French petrol into Germany. Never since its earliest history has
proud France fallen so low as it is today, and it shudders to think
that it may not have reached the end of its humiliating surrender.
No people in the world today respects France -- except priest-
ridden Quebec.

     Belgium lies under an almost impenetrable cloud, earning its
dry bread only by working for the master whom it has for quarter of
a century hated more than any other on earth. Austria has perished.
It is again the despised southern fringe of the German Reich. The
Croats, who were persuaded by their priests to betray their
country, fight the men to whom they betrayed it because they were
the Pope's allies. The Slovaks who were similarly persuaded to
complete the ruin of the country in which they had, enjoyed freedom


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               24

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

and social welfare now melt away on the battlefield of Russia.
Latin America, the huge conglomeration of states which at the wave
of Pacelli's white hand declared itself Catholic, once more, is
rent and bewildered. The Pope's allies, the people find, had
plotted to ruin them and now hang about their shares with murderous
intent. And Germany and Japan, on whose success the Pope had
gambled the whole security of his Church, seem to have reached the
peak of their victories and have begun the decline that leads to
the pit in which the fully developed strength of America, Russia,
and Britain is bound to bury them.


                            Chapter V

        THE MONSTROUS ATTEMPT TO RESTORE THE MIDDLE AGES

     The treacherous irruption by night of Japan into the war has
transformed it into the phenomenon which has been forecast, with
heavy foreboding, for 20 years -- a world-war. Almost the entire
civilized world is now involved in it. A few powers -- Sweden,
Switzerland, Turkey, and Argentina -- are genuinely neutral, but,
however clearly we may understand the difficulties of their
position, no one regards it as an honorable distinction. The rest
of the civilized world is divided into countries which live under
the most hated emblems the world has seen for many centuries -- the
Swastika and the Rising Sun (for Italy writhes under the former of
these) -- and countries which are sworn to bring them down to the
dust.

     Apart from Latin America, which is, as I said, distracted
between its Papal assurances and the discovery of the perfidy and
brutality of the Pope's allies, all Catholic countries fall in the
first category. Their national flags where they still have any,
are, if not deeply stained with dishonor, generally regarded with
contempt or a pity that is tinged with disdain. There can be few
more miserable statesmen in the world than Eugene Pacelli, or His
Holiness Pius XII. Ten years ago he pledged his Church to a belief
in the ultimate victory of Germany, Italy, and Japan. In the ruin
of all liberal, as well as Socialist and Communist, ideals which
they would effect no strong voice would be raised in protest,
against his alliance with a bestial greed that sought to attain its
end's by brutality almost without precedent in history. His
gauleiter and his gestapo would, as always, loyally support the
Vatican policy. The end justifies the means. As to the mass of the
faithful, when did any large body of them ever rebel when Pope and
Black International were united in their policy? And in the
glorious extension of the power and wealth of the Church, the
annihilation of its deadliest enemies, which the Pope anticipated
from the victory of Swastika and the Rising Sun few Catholics would
be in a critical mood.

     In the second stage of the war, when the Germans, finding
nearly all Europe in their power and confident of Subduing the
remainder, began to disclose their real sentiments about Italy --
which the Vatican ought to have learned from Mein Kampf 20 years
ago -- and proposed to share the world with Japan only, the Pope
had a new dream. It suited the interests of the Vatican just as
well as it was to the interest of Germany that Southern Europe 

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               25

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

should have its industries destroyed. Big industries mean clotted
urban populations, free discussion, freethought, birth control, and
so on. The Vatican had seen that painful development in France,
Belgium, Italy, and Czecho-Slovakia. The Black International was
ready to join in the plot to de-industrialize those countries and
let Germany glow rich by a monopoly of industry, in Europe. Petain,
with the priests at his elbow, openly mumbles it, in his senile
honesty, and has within the last month closed down a thousand
industries in France. Leopold of Belgium and his Catholic
satellites, Franco, and Salazar cheerfully send their skilled
workers to Germany or to the Russian shambles. Hitler would allow
a Catholic League of Southern Europe, and through Spain and
Portugal the 100,000,000 folk of Latin America would be drawn into
it. Hitler promised the Subjection to the Vatican of all branches
of the Greek and Oriental Churches. Japan promised a monopoly of
Christian missions (if thoroughly Japanized) in the Far East. . . 

     That these were the plans on which the Vatican worked I showed
on Catholic admissions and by the plain testimony of facts in the
first ten booklets. Already the vast field of Catholic triumph is
a scorched earth. The Pope is ill, silent, desperately watching the
last critical phases of a conflict that, unless it be won speedily 
by the Axis, will inexorably be lost. From those windows of the
Vatican Palace which look out upon the world he sees only one flag
waving above the ruins unsullied: the Hammer and Sickle. Britain
has won respect by the courage and endurance of her people but,
after a series of retreats that are rare in British history, has
still to, and doubtless will, redeem the honor of its flag. There
is a stain on the Stars and Stripes that has yet to be removed.
Russia. has made no large blunders but has met the initial impact
of an irresistible force and the loss of vast fertile provinces and
great industries and has begun its recovery with a devotion,
energy, and self-sacrifice that have torn the Pope's libels to
tatter's. Bring on your stage today representative figures of all
the Pope's peoples -- the pale and ragged Italian, the gaunt
Spaniard, the illiterate and poverty-stricken Portuguese, the
shame-faced Belgian or Vichy Frenchman, the hesitating Latin
American -- and at the end of the file bring on a Bolshevik, and
listen to the judgment of the audience. What the Pope cursed the
world blesses: what he blessed the world curses. The Pope has lost.

     But, aside from the fact that in America the Black
International is powerful enough to hide this truth from the mass
of people, remember that the Pope has lost dozens of times before,
yet he has today more subjects than ever, immeasurably greater
wealth, and a new power in non-Catholic countries.

     A week ago a powerful British air-fleet bombed Cologne. I had
wondered how long it would be before this was done. Here was one of
the most vital and most vulnerable bottle-necks in Europe. Through
it passed practically all the war-supplies from Holland, Belgium,
and Northern France. Thoroughly smash the railway through the city,
where it approaches the Rhine, and the great bridges, and you deal
Germany a terrific blow. But -- I once spent five or six weeks in
Cologne -- the cathedral is close to the railway and the bridges.
It was unhurt, and who will believe that the vital part of the
railway and the bridge which carries it over the river, which are 


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               26

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

only a few hundred yards from the cathedral, were properly treated
if no bomb strayed across the square? I hear that, at the prayer of
British Catholics, our airman were told to run no risk of touching
the cathedral.

     Why was Rome never bombed? There were times when this was
within our power, and it might have had a very considerable
influence on our fortunes in the Mediterranean area. H.G. Wells
asked me the other day if I knew why it was not done. I do not
know. These things are not put on paper, and if they were the paper
would never see the light. But there is a grapevine, and the
message went along it that through Roosevelt American Catholics
threatened things, and there were Black International threats in
parts of the British Empire, if we bombed Rome. Mussolini probably
patted his Papal friend on the back.

     However these things may be, remember that Rome has many times
in history seemed to be doomed because of its Papal alliances with
brutality, but it recovered. About 850 years ago the Romans
themselves drove one of the strongest of the Popes into exile for
such an alliance. In 1527 Catholic armies wrecked Rome as Goths and
Vandals had never done. Early in the 19th Century, a contemporary
tells us, Napoleon's generals, entering Italy and carrying off the
Pope, decided that this was to be the end of the Papacy; and not
many years later Macaulay made his foolish prediction that there
would still be a Papacy when visitors from New Zealand came to see
the ruins of London.

     I dislike prediction's, and indeed I have accomplished the
work which I set out to do in this series of books. I proved to the
hilt the indictment I brought against the Black International, and
I have now shown that the Church of Rome is of such a nature, so
dangerous in its structure and so feeble in its intellectual
appeal, that it is bound to look for such allies in every age. A
third line of evidence is found in Papal history, especially during
the last century and a half. Violence has always -- I do not know
if this was in the protocols given by Jesus to Peter -- been the
policy on which the Black International relied. The Popes merely
kept the weapon tucked under their cassocks during the few decades
between the death of feudal tyranny and the birth of totalitarian
tyranny. The leopard does not change its spots, but it may have
them white-washed.

     Nevertheless I may conclude with a glance at the future. This
German-Japanese horror shall and will perish. As I write there is
still time for a serious setback to Britain, Russia, or America, or
all three. I have never been tempted to underrate the ability of
the men who, behind the miserable tinfoil Siegfried and his greedy,
friends, direct the German effort or the cunning and lean energy of
the Japanese. If this serious advance of the Axis does not occur in
the next few weeks we may breathe freely. Within, two further
months the retreat will begin. The end, this year (if Britain opens
a second front) or next, is certain.

     What will Rome do? Remember first that comparatively few
people know the story of its guilt. A few American papers have at
intervals reported Vatican events which suggested it. The vast 
majority of the leading papers, both in America and Britain, never 

                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               27

                     THE FRUITS OF ROMANISM

gave any news which gave their readers an inkling of the truth.
Fortunately, much had been reported -- the compact with Mussolini,
the Concordat with Hitler, the enthusiastic support of Franco, the
diplomatic arrangement with Japan, and so on -- before the
bestiality of Fascism had revealed itself, and such facts as that
the only voluntary "crusaders" against Russia are from Catholic
countries and the unconverted isolationists of America play up
strongly to the Catholic minority, give us a basis in the Public
mind for a proper education.

     It is therefore probable that there will not be the general
outcry against Rome that a man who has read the full evidence
would. expect. No other writer of influence has the courage and
honesty to warn the public, as Wells does, that instead of having
been reconciled with the modern spirit the Church of Rome is as
dangerous an enemy of civilization as ever. One thing only would
cause the Church the deepest alarm: if the victory of democracy
were to put Communism and Socialism back in the places they
occupied years ago. Will this happen?

     It depends very largely upon America. When the war is over the
isolationists will be amongst the loudest to demand that America
shall have a leading voice in the settlement of Europe and China.
Every sensible man will welcome the aid of America in such a
restoration of Europe that, instead of sowing the dragon's teeth as
we did at Versailles at the close of the last war, we have every
guarantee that is humanly possible of a lasting peace. But the
terms of settlement that have been so far announced are ominously
vague, and we know only too well what "stability" means on the lips
of these folk.

     You will find, when the time comes, that the Vatican will make
a brazen attempt to secure a voice as one of the great stabilizing
forces. You will find Catholics everywhere combining with the
reactionaries who want to plan the new Europe. They will want
Leopold restored, men like Bonnet put in power in France Franco
firmly established in Spain and Salazar in Portugal, the royal
family propped on the throne of Italy, and so on. By hook or crook
they will try to get Russia, which will have won the war in Europe,
excluded from the settlement. They will insist that religion be
"strengthened," knowing that Romanism,, Buddhism, and Islam have
worked on the side of our enemies, and that Communism be taken at
the Pope's valuation. If the present generation tolerates these
things and does not insist on the guilt of every party being
stamped upon the mind of the world they will deserve their future.
The struggle for the rights of man which has reddened Europe with
blood for a century and a half will enter upon a new phase.



                          ****     ****


    Reproducible Electronic Publishing can defeat censorship.


                          ****     ****


                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                               28






Another mainstream article that would not have been allowed to be
printed ten years ago.

ENCOUNTERS WITH MEN IN BLACK

(Minneapolis Star Tribune) -- They sat quietly, leaning toward the lectern
in a dark-paneled room near Lake Calhoun as a professor from New York told
of his encounter with one of the mysterious Men in Black. In the audience
were people like biophysicist Otto Schmitt, a retired professor of
electrical engineering at the University of Minnesota, retired aircraft
developer and physicist Cecil Behringer, physician Steven Zuckerman and
polymer scientist Arthur Coury, Medtronic's director of venture
technology.

Peter Rojcewicz told them there have been hundreds - perhaps thousands -
of such encounters over the centuries. "The Men in Black are part of the
extraordinary encounter continuum - fairies, monsters, ETS, energy forms,
flying saucers, flaming crosses," said Rojcewicz, a 37-year-old professor
of humanities and folklore at New York's Juilliard School. The modern era
of Men in Black - visitations by mysterious, black-clad men who seem evil
and threatening - goes back to at least the early 1950s when a man named
Albert K. Bender allegedly saw a UFO in Bridgeport, Conn., and was later
frightened by a visitation from three Men in Black.

Rojcewicz told the audience that his own MIB (Men in Black) experience
occurred in 1980. "I have never gone public with this before," he said.
Most of the modern era MIB encounters have followed sightings of UFOs or
strange lights.  Rojcewicz's encounter involved no sightings.  He was just
sitting in the University of Pennsylvania library, reading a UFO book
suggested by another professor who thought that Rojcewicz, as a
folklorist, would be interested in such phenomena. "Then in the corner of
my vision I noticed a black pants leg and a black shoe, scuffed,"
Rojcewicz said. The folding chairs in the auditorium of the Bakken Library
of Electricity in Medicine, 3537 Zenith Av. S., stopped creaking as
Rojcewicz's audience listened intently. Standing in front of him,
Rojcewicz said, was a very gaunt, very pale man.  He was about 6-1,
weighed about 140 pounds and wore a black suit, black shoes, black string
tie and a bright white shirt. "His suit was loose and it looked as though
he had slept in it for three days,"  Rojcewicz said.

Rojcewicz didn't know what to make of the figure. At the time he wasn't
aware of the Men in Black phenomena which, he subsequently learned, dates
back to at least Biblical times. "He sat down, like he had dropped from
the ceiling - all in one movement" - and folded his hands on top of a
stack of books in front of him, Rojcewicz said. The Man in Black asked
Rojcewicz what he was doing. Rojcewicz said he was reading about flying
saucers.  "Have you seen a flying saucer?" the Man in Black asked.
Rojcewicz said he hadn't. "Do you believe in the reality of flying
saucers?" Rojcewicz said he didn't know much about them and wasn't sure he
was very interested in the phenomena. The man screamed: "Flying saucers
are the most important fact of the century and you are not interested?" "I
tried to calm him," Rojcewicz said.  The man got up, once again all in a
single awkward movement, put his hand on Rojcewicz's shoulder and said:
"Go well on your purpose" and left.

Rojcewicz looked out at his audience.  "In 10 seconds I was overwhelmed by
fear. . . . I had a sense that this man was out of the ordinary and that
idea frightened me. . . . I got up and walked around the stacks toward
where the reference librarians usually are. The librarians weren't there.
There were no guards there - there was nobody else in the library. . . . I
was terrified."

He went back to the table where he had been reading "to get myself
together. It took me about an hour. Then I got up and everything was back
to normal, the people were all there." He didn't talk about his experience
in public because he was concerned about how people might react to his
story, he said.

Was he dreaming? He doesn't think so. He said he suspects he was in an
"altered state." Rojcewicz said he thinks his experience - and that of
others who have been exposed to the Men in Black - are somewhere "in the
crack" between real life and fantasy.

He has been studying anomalous phenomena such as the Men in Black ever
since his 1980 experience. He has interviewed many people who have
reported UFOs, flying saucers and Men in Black experiences. He said the
Men in Black most frequently appear in threes, but sometimes in twos, ones
and fours.  Some of the MIBs carry brief cases and represent themselves as
being Air Force UFO investigators, he said. The MIBs warn UFO spotters to
tell no one of their experiences with aliens from outer space.

When the MIBs leave, people are fearful, dizzy and, sometimes, nauseous,
he said. Frequently their lives are changed by the experience. Some become
more successful in their jobs and marriages and report a joie de vivre.
Others lose their jobs and marriages. One of his friends quit a good
academic position and went into hiding, he said. Some become addicted to
drugs, and many feel they have been victimized, he said.

He said the reaction varies with a person's culture, religion or openness
to imaginative ideas. To illustrate the various reactions he cited a case
of a psychiatrist and her husband, a professor of education, who saw a UFO
in Maine and subsequently had a MIB encounter. "She has been all right
since then, but he has not." The professor was left lethargic and troubled
by the encounter.

Rojcewicz, who teaches at the C. J. Jung Foundation for Analytical
Psychology as well as at Juilliard, said he suspects the psychiatrist was
able to handle the experience better because she is more open to spiritual
matters while her husband by training and experience is rooted in the
acceptance of only what seems reasonable.

In another case, Rojcewicz interviewed a woman named Deborah from
Burlington, Va., who said she had been visited by a slender, 6-foot, 9-
inch Man in Black who was wearing a bowler hat.  She said her knees went
weak when the man was close to her.  She said of her experience: "There
was something wrong - evil about this." When Rojcewicz telephoned Deborah
to recheck his notes, there was a beeping on the line and they couldn't
hear each other. He redialed and the line was all right.

Rojcewicz said there are references to Men in Black going back to Abraham
in Biblical times, and there have been many similar stories in folklore
over the years.  Often the Men in Black have been considered to be the
devil or his representatives. Some of the Roman Catholic church's saints
had Men in Black experiences.  The church itself recognizes the
possibility by endorsing exorcism, Rojcewicz said.

What is a good defense against the Men in Black? "Laughter," Rojcewicz
said. "If they ask you why you're laughing, tell them, `Rojcewicz told me
to do it.' " He added: "When you confront evil, don't feed them your fear.
Say you are not worried - ha-ha."

When his talk was over, several of those attending were asked if they took
the Men in Black stories seriously. "Maybe there is something there," said
Dennis Skillings, director of the Archaeus Project, which sponsored the
meeting.  But he said he doubts that there is any way of confirming that
MIB encounters "really, truly happened."

Zuckerman, a specialist in internal medicine, said he thought  Rojcewicz
was serious. "I have a friend who knows a fellow who is investigating
reports that men from space are coming to Earth and taking biopsies of
people's calf muscles," Zuckerman said.  "He says the biopsy sites heal
right away." Why would people from outer space take biopsies of people's
calf muscles? "An interesting question," Zuckerman said with a smile.

The Archaeus Project, which is subsidized by Medtronic founder Earl
Bakken, regularly brings in researchers in the field of the paranormal and
so-called alternative science for special lectures.

      To:  All                        Message #:  3657 
    From:  New York On-line           Submitted:  25 Apr 92 09:21:00  
 Subject:  Ralph McGehee on Grenada      Status:  Public
Received:  No                             Group:  PUBLIC_EYE (27)

9:03 pm  Apr 13, 1992 by dxc4@po.CWRU.Edu in cdp:misc.activism.
Ralph McGehee on Grenada
Thanks to John DiNardo for providing me with this tape of a brief
excerpt of a press conference by former CIA agent Ralph McGehee,
broadcast on radio station WBAI in New York.
____________________________________________________________________
 
My own particular distress, if you want to call it -- it's 
much more than that -- with the Agency was deceptions over 
Vietnam. There were so many, it's hard to talk about. Its 
intelligence was almost an arm of its disinformation. Just one -- 
I'm not going to have time to go into that, but I'll talk about 
Grenada. I think the masterpiece of all disinformation operations, 
the _Piet`a_ of disinformation, was the operation at Grenada.
Now the United States invaded Grenada on the basis that 
Grenada posed a threat to America's national security. Here's an 
island nation of 100,000 people, half of them children; they had 
no army, no navy, no air force, they didn't even have a commercial 
airline, that we invaded because it posed a threat to America's 
national security. Now you can sell that to the American people, 
you can sell them anything. And indeed, after this was done, 
Reagan's popularity soared. How did we do it? The armada that was 
going off to the Middle East because of the bombing of the Marines 
in Lebanon took a short stop at Grenada, and all media were not 
allowed on the island for several days. The President went on 
television and said, "My fellow Americans, we got there just in 
time. We found three warehouses loaded to the rafters, one with 
Communist weapons." And Grenada was going to sponsor revolution 
throughout all of Central America, the whole story. Finally, when 
the media was allowed on the island, they rushed to the warehouse 
to see these Communist weapons, and they noted that there were 
only some Communist weapons, only half full, and many of them were 
American weapons. Of course, you have to realise that the 
Department of Defense was solely in charge of disseminating 
information at that particular point, and [they were asked] well, 
how could these be Communist weapons? "Well, they were left behind 
in Vietnam." Later on, these weapons, by a circuitous route, ended 
up back in the CIA. 
 
There is also -- when the story that Grenada posed a threat 
to national security began to fade, you know, people began to 
appreciate that this little tiny country couldn't really pose a 
threat to anybody, we then retreated to television, on the nightly 
news, showing an artillery barrage, against -- they were wiping 
out pockets of Cuban resistance. What we weren't told was that 
this was totally staged: there was nobody shooting back. They were 
just shooting up in the mountains, some of the American soldiers 
shooting up there, and this was portrayed to us as wiping out 
pockets of Cuban intervention. Later we came to find out that Cuba 
had about fifty airport workers on the island, one or two military 
advisors, but that was after all the information had had its 
effect. 
 
My time is out. Disformation operations are the plurality of 
CIA covert operations; they have had a very mighty impact, 
particularly on the Vietnam war, which cost somewhere between 
three hundred and nine hundred billion dollars. Whenever you want 
to determine a target for overthrow, you look at the focus of the 
media and the use of its deception operations, and you can pretty 
well determine that this is a target. Thank you.
-- 
Full frontal nudity? Yes, I'd do it if it was
valid ... er, if the money was valid ... and
if it were a small part.
 

--- Tabby 2.2
 * Origin: NY On-Line  **The Best of Peacenet**  718-852-2662 (1:278/607)


